n this unit, you will learn about the concept of geography and map reading. 
The major topics to be covered include the meaning of geography, scope of 
geography, branches of geography, what makes geography a science, meaning 
of map, historical development of maps, uses of maps, classification of maps, 
magnetic declination, linear and areal scales, how to find the scale of a map, 
measurement of regular and irregular shaped areas and statistical diagrams. 
Geography, as a branch of knowledge, has been defined by different people. 
The ancient Greeks and Romans defined it as the description of the earth. The 
Germans in the 18th century defined it as a science that deals with the relationship 
between people and their environment. In the mid 20th century, it became a spatial 
science dealing with the arrangement and distribution of things and phenomena 
over the surface of the earth. 
The differences in these definitions reflect the fact that geography had various 
scopes during its historical development. Initially it was considered as a general 
earth science; geography has now become a science that examines “place and 
space” on the Earth’s surface in relation to location, distribution, arrangement, 
interaction, causes and effects of (things and) phenomena. Modern geography 
is a spatial temporal-areal science. 
Nowadays, geography has two main branches of study - physical and human.
The most important tools that geographers use are maps. Like the science of 
geography itself, maps have evolved over the centuries. They have changed from 
simple sketches to complex representations such as spatial data compilations, 
which you will study in later grades.
Start-up Activity
Examine carefully Figure 1.1 and 
try to understand their linkage 
with the subject Geography.
Figure 1.1 Geographic profiles
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 3
Introduction 1.1 Introduction To The Concept Of Geography
1.1 INTRODUCTION TO THE CONCEPT OF 
GEOGRAPHY
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ define the term geography; 
Þ describe the development of geography as a discipline; 
Þ determine the scope of geography; 
Þ identify the branches of geography; and 
Þ identify the characteristics that make the subject of geography a science.
Key Terms
³ Spatial
³ Geography
³ Scope 
³ Development
³ Science
1.1.1 Meaning of Geography
What is geography? Do you think that geography has a single universally 
accepted definition? Why? 
From the ancient Greeks to modern-day geographers, geography has been defined 
differently. However, the various definitions share some common ideas. 
Here are some of the most important definitions that geographers have proposed:
F Eratosthenes (276-196 BC) – Geography is the description of the earth.
F Concise Oxford Dictionary (1964) – Geography is the science of the 
earth’s surfaces.
F Hartshorne, R. (1899-1992) – Geography is a branch of knowledge 
that is concerned with the provision of an accurate, orderly and rational 
description of distributions on the surface of the earth. 
F Yeates, M. (1968) – Geography is a science that is concerned with the 
rational development and testing of theories that explain and predict 
the spatial distribution and locations of (things and) phenomena on the 
surface of the earth. 
Grade 9 Geography 4
1.1 Introduction To The Concept Of Geography
As you can see, each of these definitions includes the idea that geography studies 
the earth. Most of them specify the surface of the earth. 
At this level, we will define geography as a branch of science that studies the 
earth’s surface and the distribution, arrangement and interaction of natural and 
human features and their causes and effects.
1.1.2 The Scope of Geography
What is scope? How wide is geography’s scope? 
F Scope means the range and variety 
of contents which are included in a 
subject or field of study. Geography’s 
scope is very wide. As the scope is 
dynamic, it changes often as new 
discoveries and ideas enter the field. 
F Geography studies a great many 
physical and human features of the 
world. Its focus includes their causes, 
effects, and interactions. As indicated 
above, the subjects that geography 
examines include features in the 
hydrosphere, atmosphere, lithosphere 
and biosphere.
Geography has undergone profound changes in its scope and focus: 
F In ancient times, geography was considered to be the mother of many 
other sciences, including philosophy and the earth sciences. 
F In the 16th century, geography began to emphasize location, focusing on 
questions of where, why and what.
F In the mid 18th century, European geographers, especially Germans, 
considered the relationship between geography with philosophy. This 
approach caused geography to focus on the relationship between human 
and the natural environment. Alexander Von Humboldt and Carl Ritter 
were among the major contributors to this approach. 
F In the 19th century, geographical societies and research groups formed. 
They enhanced the role of geography as a discipline. 
F In the late 20th century, geography became a spatial science. 
Note 
 The earth’s surface consists of:
Â hydrosphere – It includes 
all the bodies of water, i.e., 
oceans, rivers, lakes and 
others. 
Â biosphere – This refers to all 
living organisms in and on the 
earth’s surface. 
Â atmosphere – It includes all 
aspects of air composition 
surrounding our planet. 
Â lithosphere – It is the solid 
layer of rocks which covers the 
entire surface of the planet.
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 5
1.1 Introduction To The Concept Of Geography 1.1 Introduction To The Concept Of Geography
1.1.3 Branches of Geography
What are the two branches of geography? Can you list some of the fields of 
geography that fall into each of the two branches? 
You have studied the definition of geography, and you have considered its scope. 
Next you will learn about the main parts of geography – its branches.
They are:
F Physical geography 
F Human geography
 
What does physical geography study? 
i Physical Geography: This branch of geography studies the distribution of 
the natural features of the world, such as climate, landforms, soil, vegetation, 
and drainage systems. Physical geography also considers causes, effects 
and interactions of these features. 
Physical geography includes the following specialized fields of study:
F Climatology: studies factors that create climate and examines the 
variation and distribution of climate and related causes and effects.
F Geomorphology: studies the distribution of landforms (such as 
mountains and plains) and the forces that change them. 
F Soil geography: studies the distribution of soils and their characteristics.
Climatology 
Geomorphology 
Soil geography
Oceanography
Cultural geography 
Population geography
Urban geography
Human geography
Physical geography
Branches 
of
Geography
Biogeography
Historical geography
Political geography 
Economic geography 
Grade 9 Geography 6
1.1 Introduction To The Concept Of Geography
F Biogeography: studies the distribution of plants and animals in relation 
to the environments that they inhabit.
F Oceanography: studies the location, causes and effects of ocean 
currents, waves and tides. 
What does human geography study? Do you know the sub-branches of human 
geography? 
ii Human Geography: This branch of geography studies the distribution and 
influence of human aspects of our world, including cultures, population 
settlement, economic activities and political systems.
Human geography includes these specialized fields of study:
F Cultural geography: studies the distribution and interactions of 
cultures, including peoples’ beliefs and customs. It also examines the 
movement, expansion and interaction of cultures on the surface of the 
earth. 
F Population geography: studies the distribution, growth and structure 
of population. 
F Economic geography: studies production, consumption and exchange and 
the spatial distribution of goods and services and factors affecting them. 
F Political geography: studies the distribution of political systems and 
the ways people use them to exercise power and make decisions. 
F Urban geography: studies the development and characteristics of 
towns, cities and other urban centers.
F Historical geography: is the study of the geography of the past and how 
places or regions change over time.
Activity 1.1
Discuss the following in small groups.
1 Geography studies the distribution and influence of human aspects of our 
world including cultures, population, economic activities and political systems. 
Do you agree or disagree with this statement? Why?
2 Some people say geography is concerned only with the study of place names. 
DO you agree or disagree to such idea? Why?
3 Some people say geography has a limited scope. Do you agree or disagree with 
such idea? Why?
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 7
1.1 Introduction To The Concept Of Geography 1.1 Introduction To The Concept Of Geography
1.1.4 Geography as a Science 
What is science? What makes geography a science? 
Science is a system of acquiring knowledge through scientific methods. 
These methods involve observation, identification, description, experimental 
investigation, and theoretical explanation of phenomena. 
Geography investigates facts and relationships related to physical and social 
phenomena, and examines their distribution across the world and changes over 
time. 
The main tools geography uses to gather and analyze information are observation, 
systematic description, systematic recording and mapping. As you can see from 
its subject matter and methodologies, geography is a subject that bridges the 
natural and social sciences.
Activity 1.2
In pairs, discuss the following questions: 
1 Do you appreciate learning geography? Why?
2 Is geography a science? Why? 
3 What are the areas of the study of geography? 
4 Write a short report on the relationships between geography and natural and 
social science.
 Exercise 1.1
I Determine which of the sentences is True or False.
1 Geography studies physical and human features of the world. 
2 Cultural geography studies the distribution of population and factors that 
affect their distribution. 
3 Human geography deals with human-made features on the earth’s surface, 
such as settlements, economic activities and conservation measures. 
4 The scope of geography means the extent of geography as a field of study. 
Grade 9 Geography 8
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
II Choose the correct answer. 
5 The branch of geography that studies landforms and the forces that shape 
them is known as: 
A Biogeography
B Oceanography
C Geomorphology
D Soil geography 
6 It is the solid layer of rocks which covers the entire surface of the planet. 
A Hydrosphere
B Atmosphere 
C Biosphere
D Lithosphere 
7 One of the following is not a branch of human geography 
A Political geography 
B Urban geography
C Biogeography
D Historical geography 
8 It is a branch of human geography that studies the distribution, growth and 
structure of population. 
A Cultural geography
B Historical geography
C Political geography
D None of the above 
9 One of the following is a branch of physical geography: 
A Climatology
B Soil geography
C Oceanography
D All are correct 
III Give short answers to the following questions. 
10 What are the two major branches of geography? 
11 What is the serious concern of geographical study? 
12 Which branch of geography studies the distribution of plants and animals 
in relation to the environments that they inhabit?
13 What does political geography study? 
14 What does physical geography study?
1.2 INTRODUCTION TO THE CONCEPT OF 
MAP-READING
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ explain the meaning of a map; 
Þ appreciate the historical development of maps; 
Þ state the basic uses of maps;
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 9
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Þ categorise maps based on scales and purposes;
Þ distinguish the conventional signs and symbols used to represent different 
features on maps;
Þ identify some of the marginal information given on maps;
Þ convert linear scale to areal scale;
Þ calculate the scale of a map;
Þ calculate the areas of regular and irregular shaped figures by referring to 
the scale of a map;
Þ construct statistical diagrams using simple line graphs, bar graphs and pie 
charts based on the provided data.
Key Terms 
³ Latitude
³ International Grid Reference (IGR)
³ National Grid Reference (NGR) 
³ Magnetic declination
³ Remote sensing
³ Global Positioning System (GPS)
³ Geographical Information System (GIS)
³ Longitude
Start-up Activity 
 What is the actual distance between points X and Y?
Figure 1.2 Map of Africa
Grade 9 Geography 10
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
1.2.1 Meaning of Map
What is a map? Do you remember what you have learned in previous grades 
about map? 
Here is a simple definition: 
A map is a simplified, diminished, plain representation of all or part of the 
earth’s surface as viewed from vertically above. 
Here are the main features of maps:
F A map represents all or part of the earth’s surface. 
For example, a map might show a city such as Addis Ababa, the entire 
world, or a section of a garden.
F A map is a two-dimensional (plane) representation. 
For example, a map might be printed on a piece of paper.
F Maps show the earth’s surface as if it were seen from directly above. 
This view is called a bird’s-eye view. 
F All maps are smaller than the area they represent.
F Maps are drawn to scale. In other words, the features shown on a map 
have the same relative proportions as they do in reality. 
For example, if one mountain’s diameter is twice as large as that of 
another mountain, the first mountain would be shown on a map as twice 
as large as the second. 
F Maps are simplified representations.
F Most maps use generally accepted symbols to represent natural, 
artificial or cultural features of the area they represent. They also use 
conventional notations to provide background information such as the 
map’s title, date and scale.
Activity 1.3
Discuss the following question and perform the following tasks in your group. 
1 What does this mean: “A map is a two-dimensional plane representation”? 
2 Compare and contrast maps and globes. 
3 Prepare sketch map of your locality and show on the map the settlement 
pattern in the locality. 
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 11
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
1.2.2 Historical Development of Maps 
Describe the historical development of maps. How do traditional and modern 
map-making differ from each other? 
Maps are among our oldest tools. People created maps even in primitive times. 
For instance, men and women sketched their routes to hunting, fishing and 
gathering grounds. 
Today, we also prepare maps, for many purposes. However, map-making has 
passed through many stages of development since its beginning. The two main 
stages of the historical development of map-making are: 
Â Traditional map-making 
Â Modern map-making 
A Traditional map-making
What are the major features of traditional map-making? How did people 
represent the environment on maps in the past? 
The art of traditional map-making is as old as the human race. Traditional maps 
have been made in many ways. For example, early map materials included sticks, 
shells, clay tablets, parchment, paper and solid plates of silver. 
Many traditional maps were locational. For example, they have shown the 
locations of water holes and hunting grounds and have included paths that led to 
these places. 
Focus
In traditional map-making, collecting measurements of distances, 
directions, areas and locations was one of the greatest challenges. Each 
measurement was be made by hand, through field work in the area being 
mapped. This process was laborious and tiresome. Often the accuracy of 
the resulting information is imperfect and therefore not fully dependable. 
Another main difference between traditional and modern maps is that a 
traditional map might include drawings of three-dimensional objects. As a result, 
Grade 9 Geography 12
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
a traditional map might be somewhat pictographic (or physiographic) rather than 
strictly diagrammatic. Most traditional maps are sketch maps. For example, look 
at this ancient world map that Eratosthenes drew. 
B Modern map-making
When did modern map-making start? What features characterize modern 
map-making? What is the role of GIS in modern map-making? 
The modern science of map-making has its basis in the 17th century. The various 
developments that took place during the Renaissance gave way to accurate mapmaking (cartography). Furthermore, advancements in science and technology 
resulted in the invention of better cameras and airplanes specially designed to 
take aerial photographs. Today, map-makers have diverse opportunities to acquire 
spatial information. In addition to aerial photography, satellite imagery provides 
a wealth of information. 
Nowadays, computers have come to be “close friends” of map-makers. This is 
because they have become in valuable in making maps. In the last three decades 
of the 20th century computers have been seen as integral part at almost every stage 
of the cartographic process. They play roles in the collection, storage, analysis, 
and presentation of data, and even in the mapping and reproduction of maps. 
This makes the Geographic Information System (GIS) indispensable to modern 
map-making.
Eratosthenes (276 BC-194 BC)
Eratosthenes was a Greek mathematician, 
geographer and astronomer. 
In 200 BC, Erastosthenes adopted a word 
geography, which means a description 
of the earth. 
Figure 1.3 Eratosthenes’ map
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 13
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
A GIS needs a geographic database of, for example, a digital record of geographic 
information. The first step in developing a GIS is to create the geographic database 
from such sources as maps, field surveys, aerial photographs, satellite imagery, 
and so forth. 
Generally, modern map-making is fast and uses modern ways and means of 
collecting information, such as specially designed airplanes, remote sensors and 
the Global Positioning System (GPS). 
Activity 1.4
In a small group, discuss the following questions. 
1 What are the major characteristics of modern map-making?
2 What are the components of GIS? 
1.2.3 Uses of Maps
Why are maps very important in geography? What are the major uses of maps? 
As you know, the map is geography’s most important tool. It is also one of the 
most flexible tools in terms of the information it presents and the uses we can 
make of it. For example, it can present very simple information or highly detailed 
results from a complicated geographical investigation. Maps are basically used 
for identifying locations, distance, area and direction. 
Location: With the help of a map it is possible to locate a place in reference to 
another place. For example, Ethiopia’s location can be expressed in terms of its 
neighbouring countries, external land masses and water bodies. 
It is also possible to locate a place using astronomical grid references – parallels 
and meridians. For example, the absolute location of Ethiopia is 3o
N-15o
N latitude 
and 33o
E-48o
E longitude.
Distance: It is possible to calculate the distance between two or more places on 
a map. This is done by using the scale of the map. For example, the air distance 
between Bahir Dar and Addis Ababa can be calculated by using a map of Ethiopia. 
Area: The area of a place, a country, a region, a continent, a sub-continent or the 
whole world can be calculated from a map. This is done by measuring the length 
and the width of the given place on the map and by converting them to ground 
distances with the help of the scale of the map. 
Grade 9 Geography 14
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Direction: A map can enable us to identify the direction and bearing of any place 
on the map. This is accomplished by referring to another place. For example, 
a map of Ethiopia can help us to find the direction and bearing of Mekele by 
referring to Addis Ababa. 
In addition to these, maps can be used to: 
F Show the distribution of physical and human phenomena on the 
earth’s surface: distribution maps show the locations of phenomena on 
the earth’s surface. For example, we use distribution maps for Ethiopia 
to show the presence of human and animal populations, minerals, and 
vegetation. Similarly, we use distribution maps to show patterns of 
settlement, temperature, and health conditions. 
F Show surface configuration: topographic maps give information 
about variations in height on the earth’s surface. For example, they 
show heights and depths of valleys, plains and mountains. 
F Offer visual comparisons: because the earth’s surface is vast, it 
is difficult to compare places by direct observation. For example, it 
would be difficult to compare the distribution of landforms in Ethiopia 
and Kenya, even from an airplane. However, by offering us relatively 
small but accurate representations of the two countries, maps solve this 
problem completely. 
F Support development planning: Maps can provide planners with 
vital information to plan for the future. For example, maps can show 
current conditions and ongoing trends, and they can help us predict a 
nation’s socioeconomic conditions. Such information is invaluable to 
the country’s planners as they analyze possibilities and livelihoods and 
then prepare for the future.
Activity 1.5
Look at the map in Figure 1.2 and perform the following tasks and answer the 
following question. 
1 Write down the relative location of Ethiopia. 
2 Which neighbouring country is located south of Ethiopia? 
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 15
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
1.2.4 Classification of Maps
How many types of maps do you know? Do you think that all maps are one and 
the same? Why? 
Although most maps have similar characteristics, they can differ from one another 
in many ways. 
This topic teaches you how to classify maps in terms of the following features: 
F Focus and level of detail (purpose) – the amount of information they 
present about their subjects, especially their ability to show small 
details. 
F Scale – the size of the area for which they give information and, 
therefore, the scope of the information that they give about these areas. 
Classification Based on Purpose: 
Maps can be classified as general-purpose or specific-purpose. 
General-Purpose Maps
What are general-purpose maps? What are they used for? List uses of 
topographic maps. 
A general-purpose map is a map that shows the features of a place in a relatively 
general way. It provides a wide range of information about the place it represents. 
General-purpose maps are not topical. Instead, they tend to contain a little of many 
kinds of information at a relatively low level of detail. Topographic information 
of each kind in lesser detail. A topographic map is a good example of this. It can 
illustrate both physical and human-made features of the earth. 
Focus
General-purpose maps are prepared to provide a wide range of information 
about different features of an area. They contain a little information of 
each kind about the area they represent. Their ability to provide different 
information is their advantage, whereas their weakness is to show limited 
detailed information.
Grade 9 Geography 16
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Specific−Purpose Maps
What kind of map is a specific-purpose map? How does it differ from a generalpurpose map?
Specific-purpose maps are often called thematic maps or topical maps. We use 
these terms because specific-purpose maps emphasize on a single topic. These 
maps show detailed information about their subjects. Thematic maps can show 
almost any kind of information that varies from place to place, such as population 
distribution, rainfall and temperature patterns, and the distribution of types of soil 
or vegetation.
F Soil maps 
F Vegetation maps 
F Climate maps
Focus
Specific-purpose maps are thematic/topical maps. They usually show a 
high level of detail and have a deep focus on their subjects. Many specificpurpose maps are created for specialists in particular subjects.
Classification by Scale
Scale is a ratio that shows the degree to which the area that is mapped has been 
reduced. Based on scale differences, maps can be classified into:
F Large-scale maps 
F Medium-scale maps
F Small-scale maps 
Let us now consider each of these types of map in more detail. 
Large-Scale Maps ≥ 1:50,000
What are large scale maps? 
Large-scale maps present small areas in detail with great accuracy.
Large-scales are greater than or equal to 1:50,000. A large-scale map, such as the 
map of Addis Ababa, shows the city in considerable detail. 
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 17
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Large scale maps present a relatively small area and show its features in considerable detail. For example, at a scale of 1:5,000, a map of a city can include many 
features – such as buildings. The map can also include many details, such as the 
bends in highways.
Medium-Scale Maps 1:50,000 - 1:250,000
What are medium-scale maps?
These are maps that are prepared with scales that range between 1:50,000 and 
1:250,000. Medium-scale maps cover wider areas than large scale maps, but 
cover smaller areas than small-scale maps. They are also able to present more 
detailed information than small-scale maps but are less detailed than large-scale 
ones.
Small-Scale Maps ≤ 1:250,000
What are small-scale maps?
Small-scale maps are those which are prepared with scales less than or equal to 
1:250,000. These small–scale maps cover wider areas than large and medium 
scale maps. 
Focus 
Large-Scale maps Small-Scale Maps
Â Scale: ≥ 1: 50,000
Â Cover small areas
Â Contain highly detailed information
Â Scale: ≤ 1:250,000
Â Cover large areas 
Â Contain less-detailed information
Medium-Scale Maps
Â Scale: between 1:50,000 and 1:250,000
Â Cover medium sized areas
Â Contain moderately detailed information
Grade 9 Geography 18
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Activity 1.6
In pairs, discuss the following questions.
1 Do you know how a map-maker can reduce the size of ground objects while 
making maps?
2 Compare and contrast large and small scale map?
3 Compare the scale of 1 : 25,000 with 1 : 250,000. Which one is a smaller scale? 
Why?
1.2.5 Marginal Information of Maps
What is a map’s margin? What are the most common types of information that 
are found in the margin of a map? 
Maps are used to convey information. To read maps effectively, map users need 
information about the map. Such information is presented in the map’s margins 
and is known as marginal information. 
Marginal information includes:
F Title of the map: Gives the map’s name. For example, “Soil Map” 
explains that the map presents information about soil.
F Year of publication: identifies the year in which the map was published. 
Because this information tells you how old the map is, you might be able 
to judge whether the map’s contents are current or might be out of date.
F Author: identifies the copyright owner of the map and indicates who (or 
what organization) has prepared the map. 
F Place of publication and publisher: tells where the map was published 
and identifies the organization that published the map.
F Scale: This information indicates the extent to which the area that is 
represented in the map has been reduced. 
F Legend/Key: explains the meaning of the signs and symbols used in the 
map.
F Type of projection: tells the kind of projection used in making the map.
F Direction or orientation (North) arrow: Shows the north direction on 
the map.
F The magnetic declination (variation): is the difference between 
Magnetic North and True North. This will be explained later in this 
unit.
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 19
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Conventional Signs and Symbols
How do maps show different features of the earth? What do map-makers use 
to represent the different physical and human features on maps? 
Geographers have developed a standard set of symbols and other graphic 
conventional signs to represent features shown on maps. Conventional signs and 
symbols are those signs and symbols that are used on maps through the agreement 
of all map-makers of the world. They are used to represent the same detail on a 
map in all the countries of the world. 
Signs and symbols help the map reader to understand maps. Therefore, the map 
reader has to look first at the key or legend of the map.
When you create a map, the symbols you select should satisfy the following 
requirements.
F They should be uniform throughout the map.
F They should be easy to read and understand.
F The space occupation, orientation and size of the symbols should be 
constant.
Here are some of the symbols and conventional signs that are widely used and 
understood worldwide:
F cities and towns are indicated by dots or patches of shading; 
F streams and bodies of water are often printed in blue; and 
F political boundaries are shown by dot lines/solid lines. 
Table 1.1: Conventional signs and symbols
Symbol Description
All-weather road
Bridge 
Permanent lake
Plantation 
Mine
Grade 9 Geography 20
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Map Scale
What is map scale? Why do we need map scales?
The scale of a map is the ratio between the measurement of distance on the map 
and the corresponding measurement on the earth’s surface. 
For instance, the ratio of the map distance between two cities on a map and 
the actual distance between the two corresponding cities on the earth is 
the scale to which that map is drawn. 
Grid References
What is a grid reference? Why is it important? What is the difference between 
a geographic grid and a national grid reference? 
A map grid is a set of imaginary lines that divides the earth’s surface into regular 
grids.
There are two major map grid systems: 
Â International (Geographic) Grid System 
Â National Grid System
The International (Geographic) Grid System shows the absolute locations of 
places on the surface of the earth. 
Its references are made up of: 
F parallels or lines of latitude – define locations north and south of the 
equator. They are horizontal lines of the grid. 
F meridians or lines of longitude – define locations east and west of an 
imaginary north-south map line called the Prime Meridian. They are 
vertical lines of the grid.
Latitude: When looking at a map, latitude lines run horizontally. Lines of latitude 
are also known as parallels since they are parallel and are an equal distant from 
each other. Each degree of latitude is approximately 111 km apart. Degrees of 
latitude are numbered from 0° to 90° north and south. Zero degree is the equator, 
the imaginary line which divides our planet into the northern and southern 
hemispheres. 90° north is the North Pole and 90° south is the South Pole. 
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 21
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Longitude: The vertical lines of longitude are also known as meridians. They 
converge at the poles and are widest at the equator (about 111 km apart). Zero 
degrees longitude is located at Greenwich (0°). The degrees continue 180° east 
and 180° west where they meet and form the International Date Line in the Pacific 
Ocean. 
Parallels and meridians are imaginary lines. Latitudes are angular distances 
measured to the north and south of the equator in degrees, minutes and seconds. 
Longitudes are also angular distances, but they are measured to the east and west 
of the Greenwich meridian.
Try to explore how lines of latitudes and longitudes create a grid network on the 
following map.
The National Grid Systems: is used on maps of individual countries and regions 
within them. Its references differ from those of the International (Geographic) 
Grid System. 
The National Grid System uses eastings and northings. Eastings are lines that are 
drawn from north to south. Northings are lines that are drawn from east to west. 
0O 30 180OW 150OW 120OW 90OW 60OW OW 30OE 60OE 90OE 120OE 150OE 180OE
0O
30ON
30OS
60ON
90ON
60OS
90OS
Figure 1.4 The Geographic Grid System
Grade 9 Geography 22
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Eastings and northings in the National Grid System originate from the “False 
Grid Origin” that lies at the southwestern corner of the place they cover. While 
the values of eastings increase eastwards, the values of northings increase 
northwards. Eastings and northings are measured in kilometres. 
In Ethiopia, there are two ways of giving national grid reference. They are fourdigit and six-digit grid reference. Eastings are always given before northings.
For example, the six-digit grid reference of letter A is 490970. 970000 980000 990000 950000
470000 480000 490000 500000
470000 480000 490000 500000
960000
970000 980000 990000 950000 960000
A
Figure 1.5 Map of Addis Ababa
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 23
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Magnetic Declination
What is magnetic declination? What is magnetic north? What about true north?
The earth has north and south geographic poles at the northern and southern 
convergence points of the meridians. It also has north and south magnetic poles. 
Magnetic compasses that are used in navigation point towards the north magnetic 
pole, rather than the geographic North Pole. 
Magnetic declination is the difference between magnetic north and true north. It 
is the angle between magnetic north and true north from a particular point on the 
earth’s surface.
The position of the north magnetic pole moves over time. Therefore, the 
declination factor must be updated from time to time. However, a relatively new 
navigation device, the gyrocompass, is adjusted so that it points to the geographic 
North Pole directly that it does not need this compensating factor.
The amount, direction, and annual change of the variation for most localities on 
the surface of the earth has been determined, and this data is recorded. 
Figure 1.6 Magnetic Declination
Grade 9 Geography 24
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Activity 1.7
Perform the following tasks in your group.
1 Find a political map of Ethiopia and discuss the marginal information in the 
class.
2 Sketch a map of your school compound. Use a scale and symbols.
1.2.6 The Relationship Between Linear and 
Areal Scale
What is linear scale? What about areal scale? Is it possible to convert one into 
the other? How? 
F Map scale can be linear or areal. 
F Linear scale expresses the ratio of map distance to ground distance. It 
is the most common scale type. 
F Areal scale shows the relationship between map area and ground area.
Areal scale is the square of linear scale. For example, if a map has a linear scale 
of 1 cm to 6 km, then the areal scale of the map is (1 cm)2
 to (6 km)2
, which means 
1 cm2 to 36 km2
. 
To calculate linear scale from areal scale, you put the areal scale into a square 
root. For instance, if the areal scale of a map is 1 cm2 to 36 km2
, then the linear 
scale of the map is the square root of the given areal scale, as shown below. 
 
Areal Scale = (Linear Scale) = 2
2 Distance on the map
( Distance on the Ground )
Linear Scale = Areal scale= 
Map Area
Ground Area 
 =2
2
km 36
1 cm
= 1 cm to 6 km 
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 25
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Focus
Areal scale is the square of linear scale. On the other hand, linear scale is 
the square root of areal scale. Therefore, if a certain linear scale is doubled, 
then its areal scale equivalent would be four times larger than its original 
scale.
Activity 1.8
Perform the following tasks.
1 Find the areal scale for the following: 
a 1 cm to 2 km
b 1 : 100,000 
c 5 cm to 25 km
d 3 cm to 9 km
2 Find the linear scale for the following:
a 4 cm2
 to 400 km2
b 4 cm2
 to 16 km2
c 5 cm2
 to 500 m2
d 1 cm2
 to 4 km2
1.2.7 How to Find the Scale of a Map
Is it possible to calculate the scale of a map when it is not given? How?
In principle, every map should show the scale to which it has been drawn. If the 
scale is not shown, we can calculate it. 
There are two ways of finding a map scale, if it is not given:
A By using the known distance between two points on the map 
This method is used if the ground distance between two points or places shown 
on the map is given. Then use the following procedure to obtain the scale:
i Measure the distance between the two points on the map in centimeters.
ii Divide the obtained distance on the map by the ground distance to obtain 
the ratio between the two. This gives you the scale of the map.
Grade 9 Geography 26
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
To understand this better see the following example.
Let us say, if the straight-line distance between Addis Ababa and Mekele is 555 km. 
Using Figure 1.7, calculate the scale of the map: 
Â Using the distance between Addis Ababa and Mekele:
i Measure the distance between Addis Ababa and Mekele by using a 
ruler approximately 3 cm. 
The given air distance between the two places is 555 km.
ii Find the ratio between the distance on map and the actual distance. 
This is the scale. 
3 cm to 555 km = 1 cm to 185 km = 1 : 18,500,000.
B By using latitudes 
In this method, the scale of the map can be obtained by using the values of 
latitudes. 
Figure 1.7 Map of Ethiopia
Scale =
 Ground distance
Distance measured on the map
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 27
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
For example, let us calculate the scale of Figure 1.7 by using the 5o
 and 10o
 N 
latitude lines:
1 The degree difference between the two latitudes is 5o
 (10o
 – 5o
).
2 The distance that 5o
 represents is 555 km (111 km × 5).
3 The distance between the two latitudes on the map is approximately 3 cm.
4 The scale of the map is, therefore: 
 
Focus
1o latitude is about 111 km
This relationship is derived from the circumference of 
the earth – 40,000 km.
If 360o
 = 40,000 km
 1o = ?
 = 111 km
Activity 1.9
Answer the following questions in your group.
1 The ground distance between two places is 100 km. If this distance is represented 
by 5 cm on a map, what is the scale of the map?
2 If two places on the ground that are located 5o
 north and 10o
 north are shown 
10 cm apart on a given map, what is the scale of the map? 
Scale =Distance on the Map 
Ground Distance
= 
 555km
cm 3 = 1 cm to 185 km
1: 18,500,000
o
o
1 40, 000kms
360
× =
Grade 9 Geography 28
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
1.2.8 The Measurement of Regular and 
Irregular Shaped Areas
Do you think that we can tell how large an area is from a map? If so, how can 
we measure it? 
Some areas have regular or geometric shapes, such as rectangles, triangles, circles 
and squares. Others have irregular or non-geometric shapes.
This procedure is important for measuring areas on maps:
1 Measure the area of the feature on the map;
2 If the map scale is linear, convert it to areal;
3 Using the areal scale, convert the area on the map to actual ground 
area by using cross multiplication.
Measuring Regular-Shaped Areas
A regular shape is a geometrical shape such as a circle, triangle or square. If you 
are measuring an area with a regular shape, use the mathematical formula for its 
geometric shape. Then calculate the ground area by using the map’s areal scale. 
The following table gives you some of geometric formulae for calculating the 
areas of regular shapes.
Table 1.2: Geometrical formula
Regular-shaped areas Mathematical formula 
Square 
A = S2
;
 where A = area, and S = side 
Rectangle A = l × w; 
 where A = area, l = length, and w = width 
Right angle triangle A = ½ bh; 
 where A = area, b = base, and h = height
Circle A = πr2
; 
 where A = area, and r = radius. (π = 3.14 )
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 29
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
What is the ground area of the farmland?
In the above sketch, the farm has a regular shape. 
F Measure the length and width of the rectangle on the map. Obtain 
its area on the map by multiplying the length by the width (area of 
rectangle = l × w ). This gives you the area of the farm on the map.
F Change the linear scale, which is 1 cm to 2 km, into areal scale by 
squaring it. This gives you the areal scale :1 cm2 to 4 km2
.
F Convert the map area into ground area by using cross multiplication. 
In other words, if 1 cm2
 is to 4 km2
, then what will 8 cm2 be? 
This gives you the ground area of the farm 32 km2
.
Without changing the given linear scale into areal scale, it is possible to calculate 
the area.
2cm 2 km L 4 km
1cm
× = = and 4cm 2 km W 8 km
1cm
× = =
Area = L × W
Area = 4 km × 8 km
 = 32 km2
Therefore, the area of the farm land is 32 km2
.
Measuring Irregular-Shaped Areas
If the feature to be measured has an irregular shape, its area cannot be directly 
calculated by using mathematical formulae. For example, the lake in Figure 1.9 has 
an irregular shape. In such cases, we can use the grid square method to measure 
the area of the lake on the map. 
Figure 1.8 A sketch map of a farm
Farm land
2 cm
4 cm
Scale = 1 cm to 2 km
Grade 9 Geography 30
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
To better understand this, let us see how the area of the lake is measured. (See 
Figure 1.9)
In order to find the area of the lake, we follow the following steps: 
1 Copy the boundary of the lake. 
2 Draw grid lines at a uniform interval (for example, 1 cm apart) over 
the lake. 
3 Count the number of grid squares within the lake:
K number of full squares = 4 
K number of ¾ squares = 5 × ¾ 
K number of ½ squares = 4 × ½
K number of ¼ squares = 1 × ¼ 
Thus, total number of squares = 4 + 5 × ¾ + 4 × ½ + 1 × ¼ = 10
4 Calculate the approximate area of the lake. 
a First, find the area of one square by using the scale. 
 area = S2
 = 1 cm × 1 cm = 1 cm2
 or 2 km × 2 km = 4 km2
b Then, calculate the total area of the lake. 
 If one square = 4 km2 
 10 square = ? 
 The approximate area of the lake is 40 km square.
Activity 1.10
Answer the following questions in your group.
1 The base and height of a right angle triangle are 3 cm and 6 cm, respectively. 
The scale is 1 cm to 2 km. What is the ground area of the right angle triangle?
2 The radius of a circle is 4 cm. The scale is 1 cm to 5 km. What is the ground area 
of the circle.
Scale = 1 cm to 2 km
Lake
Figure 1.9 A sketch map of a lake
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 31
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
1.2.9 Statistical Diagrams
What is “statistics”? What are statistical diagrams? 
Statistics is a branch of mathematics that deals with the collection, organization, 
and analysis of numerical data. “Statistics” also refers to a collection of numerical 
information about a particular feature. Information such as the amount of crop 
that is produced, the growth rate of population, or the number of unemployed 
people in an area are all statistical figures because they present situations in terms 
of numbers. 
In geography, such statistical figures are presented by using statistical diagrams. 
Statistical diagrams are pictorial representations of numerical information. Charts, 
graphs and diagrams are examples of statistical diagrams. By using statistical diagrams, 
geographers make information easier to present and understand. It is easier to make 
comparisons, see trends (changes over time) and draw conclusions. Statistical diagrams 
are particularly important tools for presenting large amounts of statistical data. 
In this section, you will learn about some of these statistical diagrams:
Â Simple line graphs
Â Simple bar graphs
Â Pie charts
Simple Line Graph
What is a line graph?
A line graph uses lines to show changes over time. It is also used to show the 
relationship between two sets of information/phenomena. 
The line graph shown in Figure 1.10, illustrates the data presented in Table 1.3. It 
shows the changes in population size of Africa from 1750 to 2050. 
The graph can also help you to compare periods of actual and projected population 
growth on the African continent.
In the graph, the x-axis represents years, and the y-axis represents population 
size.
Steps used to draw a line graph:
1 The horizontal axis is normally used to represent an independent variable, 
i.e. time, while the vertical axis to represent dependent variable, such as 
temperature and other qualities or values.
Grade 9 Geography 32
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
2 The base of the vertical scale should be at zero, and the top should be 
slightly higher than the maximum value to be recorded on it.
3 Use small crosses or dots to mark values, when plotting the graph.
Table 1.3: Growth of the African Population (1750-2050)
Year 1750 1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 2050
Population 
(x millions) 106 107 111 133 228 797 1,846
Source: Microsoft Encarta (2008)
As we have already indicated, similar line graphs can be used to present a variety 
of data in relation to time – for example, changes in temperature, employment, 
and production. 
Simple Bar Graph
What is a bar graph?
A bar graph is another graphical tool for displaying statistical data. It uses 
horizontal or vertical bars to show different amounts of the same item or different 
values for the same phenomenon. The heights or lengths of the bars on a graph 
are proportional to the quantities they represent. 
Such a graph might show how amounts or values differ from place to place or as 
they change over time. 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
2050
Growth of the African Population 
(1750 - 2050)
Year
Population size
Figure 1.10 Growth of the African Population (1750 - 2050)
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 33
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
For example, a bar graph can be used to show the number of people living in each 
continent or to show how rainfall varies from month to month in a certain place.
The following bar graph has been prepared based on the data given in Table 1.4. 
It shows how the world’s population is distributed in six regions of the world.
Steps used to draw a simple bar graph.
1 The horizontal scale usually represent the independent variable, more 
specifically when the time element is of significant, such as when graphing 
mean monthly rainfall or annual production.
2 All bars must start at zero and bar graphs drawn for the purposes of 
comparison must be drawn on the same scale.
3 When vertical bars are drawn, the time sequence should be from left to right.
4 The width of the bar is a matter of choice. However, avoid bars that are too 
thick or too thin.
5 The value of each bar can be assessed more easily if a space or gap is left 
between each bar. 
Table 1.4: World Population by Region (2009)
Region Africa Asia Europe L. America and 
the Caribbean N. America Oceania
Population 
(in millions) 999 4,117 738 580 341 36
 Source: Population Reference Bureau (2009)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
World Population Distribution 
by Region (2009)
Population in million
Region
Figure 1.11 World population by region (2009)
Grade 9 Geography 34
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
As indicated earlier, bar graphs, like the one in the previous example, let you 
compare a single feature as it exists in different places or as it changes over time. 
For example, they can represent such statistical data as annual rainfall distribution 
on a monthly basis. The mean monthly distribution of rainfall in Addis Ababa can 
be shown as follows. The graph in Figure 1.12 has been drawn using the data 
given in Table 1.5.
Table 1.5: Monthly average rainfall of Addis Ababa, 2009
Month J F M A M J J A S O N D
Rainfall (mm) 21.3 2.7 28.4 80.6 58.9 82.6 349.9 388.3 112.9 45.8 44.4 0.0
Source: CSA Ethiopian Statistical Abstract, 2009 
Using the graph, you can identify which months are the wettest and which are 
the driest.
Pie Chart
What is a pie chart? What are they used for? 
Pie charts are circle graphs. They use segments of the circle to show the sizes of 
the items that make up its subject. The segments are shaped like the slices of a 
pie. 
0
100
200
300
400
J F M A M J J A S O N D
Monthly Distribution of 
Rainfall in Addis Ababa, 2009. 
Months of the year
Rainfall (mm)
Figure 1.12 Monthly Average Rainfall of Addis Ababa
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 35
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
The circle of the chart represents the total (100%). The segments represent parts 
of the whole. The size of each segment is proportional to the size of the part that 
it represents.
Pie charts are primarily used to 
F show the sizes of parts in relation to a single whole. 
F show the sizes of those parts in relation to each other. 
Often, pie charts also emphasize one or more significant elements in the data. 
Table 1.6 gives the area of each of the five oceans in square kilometers. Then, the 
same data appears as a pie chart in Figure 1.13. 
Pie charts use segments of a circle to show the size of items that make up a data 
series. 
Steps used to draw a pie chart.
1 The circle can be of any convenient size depending upon available space 
for drawing.
2 The circle is divided into segments which are proportional to the value of 
the individual components calculated as percentage of the total and, 1% 
of the whole circle is equivalent to 3.6% of the value of an item or data 
component. Segments can be drawn accordingly with a protractor.
Table 1.6: The Areas of the World’s Oceans
Ocean Area (million sq km)
Pacific Ocean 155.6
Atlantic Ocean 76.8
Indian Ocean 68.5
Southern Ocean 20.3
Arctic Ocean 14.1
Total 335.3
Source: Microsoft Encarta (2008)
Grade 9 Geography 36
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
Activity 1.11
Do the following in groups.
1 State the different methods used for diagrammatic representation of statistical 
data.
2 Collect data for the male and female populations of your school and draw a 
simple bar graph.
3 Draw a pie chart to illustrate the following data.
Table: 1.7 Land use area by type, 2009/10
Land utilization Percent (%)
Temporary crop area 75
Permanent crop area 7
Grazing land 9
Fallow land 4
Other land use 4
Wood land 1
Source: CSA, Agricultural sample survey, 2010
46%
23%
21%
6% 4%
The Areas of the World's Oceans 
Pacic Ocean
Atlantic Ocean
Indian Ocean
Southern Ocean
Arctic Ocean
 Figure 1.13 Pie chart of the areal coverage of the world’s oceans
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 37
1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading 1.2 Introduction To The Concept Of Map-reading
 Exercise 1.2
I Choose the correct answer.
1 A color used on a map to represent a body of water is 
A Red B Blue C Brown D Yellow 
2 The meaning of symbols on a map can be obtained from the 
A Key B Title C Scale D Grids
3 Which is not true about a map? 
A A map represents things as we see them from vertically above. 
B A map is the exact representation of the shape of the earth.
C A map is a diminished representation of a given place. 
D A map represents information with the help of symbols. 
4 If two places that are found at 1o
N and 2o
N latitudes are 5 cm apart on a 
map, what is the areal scale of the map? 
A 1 cm2 to 400 km2
B 1 cm to 492.84 km
C 1 cm2 to 492.84 km2
D 1 cm2 to 492.84 cm2
5 The corresponding linear scale of the areal scale 1 cm2
 to 100 km2
 is 
A 1 : 15
B 1 cm to 10 km 
C 1 cm to 8 km
D 1 cm to 5 km
Grade 9 Geography 38
Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY
Þ Geography is the branch of science that studies the earth’s surface and the 
distribution, arrangement and interaction of natural and human features, 
and their causes and effects.
Þ The scope of geography is very wide. Also, this scope is dynamic, which 
means that it changes often as new discoveries and ideas enter the field.
Þ There are two branches of geography. They are physical and human 
geography.
Þ Geography investigates facts and relationships related to physical and social 
phenomena, and examine their distribution across the world and changes 
over time. As you can see from its subject matter and methodologies, 
geography is a subject that bridges the natural and social sciences.
Þ A map is a simplified, diminished, plain representation of the earth’s surface. 
Þ The history of map-making is broadly categorized into traditional and 
modern. Traditional map-making traces back to history‘s earliest times. 
Modern map-making began in the 17th century. 
Þ Maps have many uses. For example, they can be used to: 
F locate places on the earth’s surface
F calculate the distance between two or more places on a map
F the area of a place, a country, a region, a continent, a sub-continent 
or the whole world can be calculated from a map 
F identify the direction and bearing of any place on the map
Þ Maps are classified as general-purpose and specific-purpose, based on 
their functions. Maps can be small-scale, medium-scale or large-scale.
Þ Marginal information of a map helps to read and understand map 
easily. The marginal information include the title, the year and place of 
publication, magnetic declination, North arrow and the legend or key.
Þ Conventional signs and symbols are those signs and symbols that are used 
on maps through the agreement of all map-makers of the world.
Þ Maps use geographic and national grid references to locate both 
human-made and natural features. 
Þ Areal scale is the square of linear scale.
Unit 1: The Concept of Geography and Map-Reading 39
Unit Review
Þ The scale of a map can be calculated by using a known distance between 
two points or between parallels or latitudes. The area of regular and 
irregular features can be measured from maps. 
Þ Regular-shaped area can be calculated by using mathematical formula 
on the map. On the other hand irregular-shaped area also can be 
calculated by using grid square method on the map.
Þ There are different types of maps. Maps differ in terms of characteristics 
such as purpose, information conveyed and variation in scale. 
Þ Line graphs, bar graphs and pie charts can be used to represent statistical 
data. These simplified and easily understandable formats make it easy to 
compare places and phenomena.
Þ Geographers use statistical diagrams to illustrate information in different 
ways. These statistical diagrams include line graphs, bar graph and piecharts. 
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 1
I Match items in column ‘B’ with items in column ‘A’.
 A
1 Political geography
2 Urban geography
3 Geomorphology 
4 Population 
geography
5 Phytogeography
 B
A is interested in political features, such as 
political boundaries and their distribution 
over the earth’s surface. 
B studies the structure and development of cities 
C studies aspects of populations, including 
distribution and change. 
D is the study of land forms and the forces that 
change them.
E examines the distribution of plants in relation 
to the physical environment. 
II Choose the correct answer. 
6 Yeates, M. definition refers to geography as: 
A an earth science
B developing and testing theories that explain the distribution of things 
over the earth’s surface
C providing information about patterns of distributions
D the relationship between human and their environment
Grade 9 Geography 40
Unit Review
7 The general trend in the development of geography indicates that its scope 
is
A wide and limitless
B specific and specialized
C universal and unbound
D interested only in natural elements
8 A map:
A is a reduced representation of the earth
B shows the earth’s surface as if it were seen from directly above
C is a two-dimensional representation of the earth
D all of the above 
9 The marginal information that shows the relationship between distance on 
the map and ground distance is:
A Key
B Scale
C Title
D Grid reference
10 Which one of the following scales is for a small-scale map? 
A 1: 250,000
B 1:75,000
C 1: 40,000
D 1:10,000
11 Large-scale maps:
A cover smaller areas than small-scale maps
B convey less information than small-scale maps
C have scales that lie between 1:50,000 and 1:250,000
D are used to cover a large area in detail
12 A statistical diagram that shows the share of a part in a whole is:
A Bar graph
B Line graph
C Pie chart
D None of the above
III Explain what the following terms mean. 
a Scale
b Statistical diagram
c Legend
d Linear s