Geography, as a discipline, helps us to learn about people, their life styles, and the 
ways their lives are affected by their interactions with their physical environments. 
Geography also provides us with closely related facts about how such factors 
affect our own day-to-day lives throughout our lifetimes. 
In the previous unit, you have learned about the concept of geography and map 
reading. In this unit you will learn about the physical environment of the world 
and Ethiopia. The unit is organized in five sub-topics. These are Forces that 
Change the Surface of the Earth, Weather and Climate, Natural Regions of 
the Earth, Ecosystem and Villagization of the World through Distance-time 
Decay. You were introduced to most of these topics in earlier units. This unit 
presents them in greater detail to give you more information about our physical 
environment and to help you interactively learn more about them. 
2.1 FORCES THAT CHANGE THE SURFACE OF 
THE EARTH
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Þ list the landforms formed by each internal force; 
Þ describe the process of each internal force; 
Þ relate some major landforms with their respective internal forces; 
Þ explain the effects of earthquakes on infrastructure; like buildings, dams, 
roads;
Þ review external forces; 
Þ state the meaning of weathering; 
Þ distinguish the different types of weathering; 
Þ identify land features resulting from chemical weathering; stalactite, 
stalagmite, pillar etc;
Þ explain the types and characteristics of agents of erosion; 
Þ relate types of erosions; 
Þ state the effects of erosion on human activities; with various landscapes; 
Þ explain the process of deposition; 
Þ recognize erosion-deposited soils and landforms. 
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 43
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Key Terms
³ Block mountains 
(Horst)
³ Caldera
³ Crater
³ Earthquake 
³ Epicentre 
³ Faulting 
³ Fissure 
³ Folding 
³ Fold mountains
³ Focus
³ Force
³ Landform
³ Lava
³ Magma
³ Orogeny
³ Rift valley
³ vent
³ Volcanism
Start-up Activity
1 What is a landform? What are the factors that influence the formation of 
landforms?
2 Look at Figure 2.1 and describe what you can see.
3 Then categorise them into internal forces and external forces. 
 
2.1.1 Internal Forces 
What are the internal forces that affect the formation of landforms? 
Those forces that drive energy from the interior part of the earth are called 
internal forces. Internal forces form the ups and downs on the earth’s crust by 
breaking and bending (faulting and folding) it. Forces inside the crust cause 
folding, faulting (cracking), volcanism and earthquakes.
Figure 2.1 Different forces that are shaping the surface of the earth
Grade 9 Geography 44
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Â Folding is one of the internal processes which occurs when two forces 
act towards each other from opposing sides. Due to this force, rock 
layers are bent into folds. The process by which folds are formed due 
to compression is known as folding. There are large-scale and smallscale folds. Large-scale folds are found mainly along destructive plate 
boundaries.
Folding can be explained using two important parameters
F Axial Plane F Limbs
Types of folding: different types of folds are created, based on the nature of the 
forces applied on bedrock. If the fold is upward and convex, it is called anticline.
If the fold is downward, it is called syncline.
Figure 2.2 Compression 
forces and their resulting 
effect
Before After
Figure 2.3 Tensional Before After
forces and resulting 
effects
Axial plane
Limb
Limb
Anticline fold
Syncline fold
Figure 2.4 Syncline fold
Figure 2.5 Anticline fold
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 45
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Fold Mountains
What are fold mountains? How are fold mountains formed? Name some of the 
fold mountains of the world.
Fold mountains are formed by crust which has been uplifted, and folded by 
compressional forces. They are formed when two plates move towards each 
other. The compressional force which is created as a result of this movement 
pushes sedimentary rocks upwards into a series of folds. Fold mountains are 
usually formed from sedimentary rocks and are usually found along the 
edges of continents. This is because the thickest deposits of sedimentary rock 
generally accumulated along the edges of continents. There are two types of Fold 
Mountains: young fold mountains (10 to 25 million years of age, example, the 
Atlas, Rockies and the Himalayas) and old fold mountains (over 200 million 
years of age, example, the Cape Range, the Urals in Russia and the Appalachians 
of the USA). 
Many ranges of mountains have been formed by folding. The Andes, the Rocky 
mountains, the Alps, the Himalayas and the Australian Alps are some examples. 
The Atlas mountains in north west Africa and the Cape Range in South Africa 
were formed by folding. This process of mountain building is called orogeny. 
Faulting
What is faulting? Describe types of faults.
Movements in the crust of the earth sometimes make cracks. These cracks are 
called faults. Faulting can be caused by either lateral or vertical forces, which 
can be either tensional or compressional. Tension causes a normal fault, and 
compression causes a reverse fault.
Activity 2.1
1 Study Figure 2.6 and identify the difference between a reverse fault and a 
normal fault. 
2 Explain the difference between tensional and compressional forces. 
3 Is faulting a way by which the surface of the earth is changed? Why or why not? 
Grade 9 Geography 46
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
 
Major features formed by faulting include rift valleys and block/Horst mountains 
Rift Valleys
What is rift valley? How are rift valleys and block mountains formed? 
A rift valley is a linear shaped lowland area between highlands or mountain 
ranges created by geologic rifts or faults.
A rift valley is a valley formed by faulting. When two parallel faults occur on the 
surface of the earth, and when the land between the two faults sinks down, a rift 
valley is formed. 
hanging wall block strike strike-slip faulting hanging wall block
strike
dip
footwall block
footwall block
dip
normal faulting dip
reverse faulting
Figure 2.6 Formation of normal and reverse faults
Rift Valley
(African rift valley)
New Ocean Basin
(Red Sea)
Mature Ocean
(Atlantic)
Mid-Ocean Ridge Sediments
Crust
Mantle
Figure 2.7 Formation of a rift valley
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 47
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Activity 2.2
In your group, answer the following question and perform the following task. 
1 Which is the largest rift valley in the world?
2 Identify the location of the largest rift valley on a map.
The largest rift valley in the world is the East African Rift Valley. It extends from 
Syria to Mozambique, passing through the Red Sea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, 
Tanzania, DR Congo, Rwanda and Burundi.
What other countries are touched by this rift valley? 
The total length of the East African Rift Valley is about 7,200 km, of which 5,600 
km is in Africa. 
The Ethiopian Rift Valley is a part of the East African Rift Valley. It extends 
from northeast to south west. Features found in the Rift Valley include active 
volcanoes, lakes, hot springs and fumaroles. 
Afar Triangle
Figure 2.8 East African Rift Valley
Grade 9 Geography 48
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Block (Horst) Mountains
What is block mountain? How do block mountains form? 
Block mountains are formed when land between two parallel faults is pushed 
upward due to pressure from inside the earth. If there are two parallel faults, the 
crustal block between them may either rise to produce a Horst (block) mountain, 
or fall, to produce a rift valley.
Examples:
F The Sierra Nevada mountains in North America. 
F The Harz Mountains in Germany. 
F The Afar block mountain in Ethiopia.
F The Ruwenzori in Africa. 
 
Activity 2.3
1 Prepare models representing 
F Types of folds 
F Anticline and syncline 
F Rift valley and block mountains using mud, paper mach’e, wood blocks, etc. 
2 Explain the meanings of 
F Syncline and anticline 
F Tensional forces and compressional forces.
Volcanism
What is volcanic activity? 
What landforms are associated with volcanic activity?
Volcanic activity is another internal force which changes the surface of the earth. 
It is caused by internal movements within the earth. Volcanism is the process by 
Figure 2.9 Formation of block mountains (Horst)
Rocks are pulled apart Pressure inside the earth
Formation of block mountain
Fault Fault
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 49
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
which magma, gases, water vapour, ashes and other solid materials are forced out 
to the surface. Inside the earth the temperature is very hot. This high temperature 
changes rocks into molten magma. When this magma reaches the surface, 
volcanic activity takes place. When the magma emerges on to the surface, it cools 
and hardens. It is then called lava. 
Magma reaches the earth’s surface through two kinds of holes. They are vents
and fissures. Magma may force its way violently through a small hole called a 
vent. If lava emerges via a vent, it builds up into a volcano (cone-shaped mound), 
and if it emerges via a fissure, it builds up to form a lava plateau or lava flow. 
Magma may pour quietly through long cracks (fissures) onto the earth’s surface. 
If the magma flows to the surface through a vent, acrater is formed. Sometimes 
a volcano erupts very forcefully. When this happens, the top part of the volcano 
is blown away. This forms a large crater called a caldera. Water collects in the 
crater or in the caldera and forms a lake. We call this a crater lake or caldera 
lake. In Ethiopia there are many crater lakes such as Zuquala, Wonchi and Dendi.
Figure 2.10 The process of volcanic activity
Grade 9 Geography 50
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
If an eruption begins again in a caldera, a new small cone-shaped volcano is 
formed inside the caldera. These are known as caldera cones. 
Part of the magma may not reach the earth’s surface, and when this magma cools, 
solidifies and forms rocks inside the crust, features such as batholiths, lacoliths,
sills and dikes, are formed. 
F A batholith is a very large mass of magma which accumulates in the 
crust. It is the largest structure. 
F A laccolith is a mushroom shaped body of intrusive igneous rock. 
Smaller than a batholith. 
F A dike is formed when magma solidifies in a vertical or near-vertical 
crack. 
F A sill is formed when magma solidifies horizontally or nearly horizontally 
along a bedding plane. 
Table 2.1: Types of volcanoes
Active volcano Erupts from time to time Erta’li, Fentale Dubbi and
Damiali 
Dormant volcano 
Has not erupted for a long time 
but may erupt again in the 
future 
Tatali and Dabbahu 
Extinct volcano Has not erupted within historic 
time 
Mt. Zuquala, Ras Dashen 
and Batu 
Figure 2.11 The most important types of 
volcanic intrusion and extrusion features
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 51
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Importance of volcanic eruptions:
F Give us some ideas about the interior of the earth. 
F Provide fertile soil. 
F Provide hot springs (with medical value). 
F Generate geothermal energy.
F Help in the formation and concentration of minerals.
F Help in the creation of new land. 
Activity 2.4
Make models of volcanoes and show the different parts of a volcano, using wooden 
blocks, mud or paper mach’e.
Earthquake
What is an earthquake? Why do earthquakes occur? 
Earthquakes are sudden movements in the earth’s crust. They are caused by 
internal movements deep down inside the earth. Earthquakes are frequently 
associated with faults. They take place along fault lines where the earth’s crust is 
weak. When an earthquake occurs, vibrations from the centre spread out in the 
form of waves in all directions. 
The point at which an earthquake originates is called the focus. The point on 
the earth’s surface immediately above the focus is called the epicentre. As the 
vibrations spin out from the centre, the damage they cause becomes less and less. 
Figure 2.12 An earthquake’s 
waves, focus and epicentre 
Grade 9 Geography 52
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
 
 
How do we determine the intensity or magnitude of an earthquake? 
The intensity of an earthquake is measured by an instrument called a seismometer, 
and is recorded on a seismograph. It records the vibrations produced by an 
earthquake. The scale which gives the magnitude is called the Richter scale. It 
ranges from 0 to 9. Each number of this scale indicates a tremor that is ten times 
stronger than the next lower number. An earthquake with a magnitude of 4.0 is 
ten times stronger than one that measures 3.0. Readings of 7.0 or higher indicate 
a strong or major earthquake. The strongest ever recorded earthquake was the 
Valdivia earthquake in Chile that occurred on May 22, 1960 (9.5 on the Richter 
scale). 
Table 2.2: Richter scale values and the corresponding magnitude of earthquakes
The Richter Scale Effects
< 3.5 
3.5 – 4.8
4.9 – 5.4 
5.5 – 6.1 
6.2 – 6.9
7.0 – 7.3
7.4 – 8.1
> 8.1
Detected only by instruments (seismometers) 
Feels like a lorry passing 
Loose things fall 
Walls crack 
Chimneys fall, some buildings collapse 
Many buildings fall, landslides 
Most buildings and bridges are destroyed 
Total destruction 
Figure 2.13 The wave pattern 
and strength of an earthquake
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 53
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Effects of Earthquakes 
What are the effects of Earth quakes? 
Indian Ocean Earthquake
In addition to destruction of life and property, an earthquake causes:
F displacement of parts of the earth’s crust vertically or laterally. 
F landslides and deep cracks in surface rocks. 
F the devastation of cities, fires and diseases. 
F the rise or lowering of the sea floor.
In December 2004, an earthquake with 
a magnitude of 9.1 to 9.3 rocked the 
Indian Ocean and caused a tsunami, 
known as the Boxing Day Tsunami. 
The initial death toll reported by the 
Associated Press was 100,000, but after 
the final count, it was reported that the 
death toll reached up to 225,000.
Legend
Meeting place of the
principal plates
Figure 2.14 The major earthquake and volcanic 
belts of the world
Grade 9 Geography 54
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
About 80% of all earthquakes occur in three regions. They are 
F Around the Pacific Ocean zone. The largest earthquake and volcano 
zone lies along the edges of the Pacific Ocean. This zone is known as 
the Pacific Ring of Fire.
F Across Southern Europe and Southern Asia. 
F The west-coast areas of North and South America. 
The two most recent earthquakes in Ethiopia measuring more than 5 on the 
Richter Scale occurred:
F July 14, 1960, near Lake Shalla with a magnitude of 6 on the Richter 
Scale. 
F June 2, 1961, in Karakore. 
Activity 2.5
In your geography work group, perform the following tasks. 
1 Describe the effect of earthquakes on people, buildings and the infrastructure. 
2 Name ten countries within the Pacific Ring of Fire. 
2.1.2 External Forces 
Weathering 
What is weathering? What is the effect of weathering on landforms? 
External forces can lower the level of the land by washing it away, and this process 
is called denudation. They also can raise the level of the land by deposition. 
Denudation consists of weathering and erosion. 
Weathering includes disintegration (physical weathering), which breaks rocks 
into smaller pieces and decomposition (chemical weathering), which forms new 
substances. 
Physical (Mechanical) Weathering 
What is physical weathering? What are the main agents of physical weathering? 
Physical weathering breaks the rocks into smaller pieces. Its main agents (causes) 
are temperature changes, frost action and the action of plants and animals.
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 55
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
The effects of temperature changes: The temperature variation between day 
and night causes rock to expand and to contract. This process causes cracks to 
develop. In time, the cracked layer peels off and falls to the ground. This process 
is called exfoliation (see Figure 2.15). 
The effects of frost action: Due to frost action, rock breaks up into pieces and 
these fragments accumulate around the lower slopes of the rock. This material is 
called scree. Frost action is very common in the winter season in the temperate 
zone and in some high mountains all year round (see Figure 2.16).
The effects of plant and animal action: Plants and animals also cause 
weathering. For example, seeds may fall in cracks of rocks. If water collects 
there, it forms suitable conditions for the seeds to germinate and grow. As plants 
develop their roots may push the rock apart. Some animals burrow, and this also 
helps to break up rocks. 
Figure 2.15 Exfoliation domes 
. . . water collects in
cracks in rocks. 
1. By day . . . 2. By night . . . 3. Eventually . . . 
. . . when temperatures
drop to 0o
C, the water 
freezes and turns to ice.
As it does so, it expands 
by about 10%. This
widens the cracks and puts
a strain on the rock.
. . . freezing and thawing
occur so frequently that 
the rock is gradually split
and broken up.
Pieces of rock which are
broken off by this freezethaw action tumble
downslope and accumilate in
heaps. These piles of rock 
fragment are called scree.
Figure 2.16 The breaking of rocks by the action of frost
Grade 9 Geography 56
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
 
Chemical Weathering (Decomposition) 
What process is important in chemical weathering? What are main agents of 
chemical weathering? 
Chemical weathering is a process that forms new substances, and it is affected 
by the minerals in the rock. Its main agents are rain action and plant and animal 
actions. 
As rain water passes through the atmosphere, it takes in carbon dioxide (CO2
) 
and forms a weak carbonic acid. When this acid water comes into contact with 
rock, it begins to dissolve minerals in the rock. The rate at which rock dissolves 
depends on the type of rock. Limestone, for example, dissolves very quickly. 
This process is known as carbonation. 
H2
O + CO2
 ⇒ carbonic acid ⇒ dissolves and erodes limestone and forms 
caves.
Example: 
Sofomer Cave along the River Weiyb in Bale. 
Figure 2.17 Breaking of rock by a plant
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 57
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
In underground rivers, seeping rain water continues to dissolve the limestone 
beneath the surface, gradually forming passages and caves. These caves contain 
features such as stalactites, stalagmites and pillars.
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.19 Underground cave in a limestone area 
F A stalactite is a limestone column that hangs down from the ceiling of 
the cave. 
F A stalagmite is a limestone column that builds upwards from the floor 
of the cave. 
Figure 2.18 Sofomer Cave, in Bale formed by the River 
Weiyb and seeping rainwater
 Stalactite
Pillar
Stalagmite
Grade 9 Geography 58
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
F A pillar is formed when a stalactite and a stalagmite join together. 
When rain water dissolves oxygen and reacts with iron in rocks, the rocks 
become rusty. 
Pollution in towns and cities increases chemical weathering. 
How do plants and animals act as agents of chemical weathering? 
Plants absorb minerals, and decaying vegetation produces organic acid, which 
causes a further breakdown of minerals. 
Bacteria in the presence of water breaks down certain minerals in the soil. 
Leaching is a major soil-forming process. It occurs when substances are 
dissolved in water that percolates through soil. Such substances include soluble 
chemicals that move out of biological tissues into soil - for example, rainfall 
causes potassium and other ions to be lost by foliage. 
Erosion
What is erosion? What are the major agents of erosion? What are the major 
types of erosion? What are the characteristics of the agents of erosion? 
Erosion is the transporting of weathered material by various natural forces such 
as moving water, wind and moving ice. 
Erosion occurs when particles of rock or soil are: 
F washed away by a river 
F removed by waves of the sea 
F crushed under a glacier 
F blown away by the wind 
Erosion by Running Water
How does running water cause erosion? What processes are included in 
erosion? 
Rivers are the most important of all natural agents which help in shaping the 
earth’s surface. The work of running water includes eroding, transporting and 
depositing eroded material. 
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 59
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
There are three types of running water erosion: 
1 Sheet erosion: occurs when surface water moves in a wide flow. 
2 Rill erosion: occurs when surface water cuts relatively small channels. 
3 Gully erosion: occurs when floods cut deep wide gorges. 
The course of a river, from its source to its mouth, can be divided into 3 stages. 
The action of the river is different in these three parts. The stages are upper 
course, middle course and lower course. 
Activity 2.6
In pairs, discuss the followinq questions.
1 What are the main characteristics of the river stages shown in Figure 2.20? 
2 Which stage has a steeper slope? 
Upper Course 
In this stage the river water is usually small in volume. As the river flows very 
fast down steep-slopes, a V-shape valley, waterfalls and deep gorges are formed. 
The fast flow of the river causes vertical erosion and destruction. The V-shape 
valley has steep sides and a narrow floor. The fast flowing river cuts down deeply 
into the land. 
Middle Course
lateral erosion
tranportation
. oodplain
. meanders
. river cliff
Long proole
Lower Course
transportation
deposition
. large channel
. oxbow lakes
. large oodplain
. deltas/estuaries
Upper Course
vertical erosion
weathering
headward erosion
. v-shaped valley
. waterfalls
. rapids
. gorges
Figure 2.20 The three stages of a river
Grade 9 Geography 60
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Waterfalls are caused by sudden drops in the level of rivers. Waterfalls are formed 
when water flows over hard rock which cannot be eroded easily, while soft rocks 
are easily eroded. The hard rock produces an overhang, and the water flows over 
it as a waterfall. 
 
The Middle Course 
During a river’s middle course, the river valley becomes wider and larger. The 
river may receive waters of many tributaries, which increase the volume of water. 
Wide-floored valleys with gentle slopping sides are the main features of the 
middle course of the river. Instead of taking the most direct course possible, the 
river begins to meander. Meanders are pronounced curves in the course of a river. 
river spur
interlocking spurs
Figure 2.21 Features of the upper course of a river
Tis Isat water fall 
Figure 2.22 Waterfall formation
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 61
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
The Lower Course 
The river flows fast, meandering over wide plains, and makes widespread 
deposition. The load is so large that deposition occurs. Flat floodplains, big 
meanders, levees, ox-bow lakes and deltas are the main features of this course. 
Floodplains are broad flat areas which border with the lower course of a river 
and are sometimes flooded by the river. They are covered with fertile alluvial 
soils which are deposited by the river when flooding. Levees are narrow ridges 
of alluvial deposits found along the bank of a river. Ox-bow lakes are crescentmoon shaped lakes created due to meanders that have been abandoned. They 
are formed when meanders are cut off from the main river channel. Deltas are 
usually triangular areas of land which are usually formed at the mouth of rivers. 
Floodplain
Bedrock
Tributary
Divide
Sediment (sand, gravel, clay)
Valley-side Valley-side
River
River
Nile Delta
This satellite image of the Nile Delta 
shows the Nile River spilling out 
from the Egyptian desert into the 
Mediterranean Sea. The longest river 
in the world, the Nile, has a delta 
about 250 km wide.
Anatomy of a Floodplain
A floodplain is a broad, flat section of 
a valley floor filled with sand, gravel, 
and clay. Floodplains form when a 
river running along a valley floods 
and spills out of its channel. The river 
then deposits sediments as it flows 
over portions of the floodplain.
Figure 2.23 Features 
of the lower course of 
a river
Grade 9 Geography 62
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Activity 2.7
In your group, perform the following tasks and answer the following question. 
1 How do rivers transport materials? 
2 If there is a river near your school, your teacher will organize a field trip to it. At 
that site, identify landforms such as meanders, waterfalls, gorges, floodplains, 
V-shaped valleys, etc. Then write a short note on your findings and present it in 
your classroom discussion. 
3 Prepare charts or models representing major landforms associated with a river. 
Erosion and Deposition by Sea Waves
What are coastal landform features produced by wave erosion?
Waves are formed when wind moves over the surface of the sea. This causes 
the particles of water to move in a circular motion, which forms a wave. This 
movement of water in the sea clashes against coastal lands and picks up rock 
particles and throws them into the sea as sediments. The work of the sea along 
the coast includes erosion, transportation and deposition. Some of these features 
formed along the shoreline are beaches, spits and lagoons. 
Figure 2.24 Features of sea wave erosion
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 63
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
Beach is a strip of land along the sea coast covered with various types of sediment. 
A Spit is a narrow ridge of sand or shingle. It projects into the sea but is attached 
to the land at one end. 
Lagoon is an area of saltwater separated from the sea by loose sandbanks. 
Wind Erosion and Deposition 
What is the most active agent of erosion in desert regions? What is the most 
common type of wind deposit? 
Wind erosion is common in desert and semi-desert areas. Wind erosion and deposition 
form different landforms such as sand dunes, barchans and loess deposits.
 
F Sand dune is a small hill of sand formed by the action of the wind. 
F Barchan is a sand hill that has a crescent-moon shape. 
F Loess deposit is a deposition of fertile soil in the desert by wind. 
Activity 2.8
In your group, perform the following tasks and answer the following questions. 
1 Describe the difference among spit, lagoon and beach. 
2 Compare and contrast barchans, sand dunes and loess deposits.
Direction of wind and movement of dunes
Barkhane (above) and plan view of barkans (below)
Figure 2.25 Landforms associated with wind erosion
Sand dunes in the Namib Desert
Grade 9 Geography 64
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth
 Exercise 2.1
Word Game 
Down 
1 The method by which the strength of an earthquake is measured. 
Across
2 Sleeping volcano. 
3 The opposite of compression. 
4 Young fold mountain in North America. 
5 Young fold mountain in Asia. 
6 Sudden movement in the earth crust. 
7 Magma may force through this narrow hole. 
8 Types of erosion occur when surface water cuts relatively small channels.
9 Downward fold of bedrock.
10 Large crater at the top of volcano.
11 Circular funnel-shaped depression produced by volcanic eruption. 
12 The side of an upfold.
13 The transporting of weathered materials by water, wind, etc. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 65
2.1 Forces That Change The Surface Of The Earth 2.2 Weather And Climate
2.2 WEATHER AND CLIMATE
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Þ explain the meaning of atmosphere; 
Þ discuss the composition and layers of the earth’s atmosphere; 
Þ explain weather and climate; 
Þ express the concept of temperature; 
Þ appraise the variation of temperature; 
Þ demonstrate how to measure and record temperature data; 
Þ compute normal temperature lapse rate; 
Þ interpret temperature data; 
Þ explain the formation of rain;
Þ discuss the types of rainfall;
Þ relate the various roof slopes of houses in various climatic regions to the 
respective types of rainfall;
Þ explain what cloud is;
Þ describe types of clouds; 
Þ practice measuring and recording rainfall data;
Þ differentiate types of winds (local, monsoon and planetary winds, including 
cyclones and anticyclones);
Þ relate direction and deflection of winds to the earth’s rotation;
Þ interpret wind speed and direction from wind gradient map;
Þ explain how conditions of wind affect structures of buildings and crop 
production;
Þ Identify types of atmospheric pressure; 
Þ relate atmospheric pressure with temperature and altitude; 
Þ demonstrate the pressure belts of the world: 
Þ develop the skills of measuring and recording atmospheric pressure; 
Þ analyze the position of the sun at various latitudes at noon time of Dec. 22/
June 21;
Þ examine the impact of latitude on temperature; 
Þ justify the effect of altitude on the characteristics of temperature, rainfall 
and air pressure; 
Þ compare and contrast the condition of rainfall and temperature between 
places of coastal and interior areas; 
Þ express the meaning and types of ocean current; 
Þ identify the impacts of ocean currents; 
Þ recognize the effects of ocean currents on temperature and rainfall on 
land surfaces; 
Grade 9 Geography 66
2.2 Weather And Climate
Þ discuss the types and location of pressure belts of the world; 
Þ state seasonal movements of pressure belts in relation to the apparent 
movement of the sun; 
Þ relate movements of planetary winds with pressure belts; 
Þ predict the impact of cloud cover on temperature.
Key Terms
³ Aerosols
³ Atmosphere
³ Convectional
³ Cyclonic
³ Evaporation
³ Exosphere
³ Jetstream
³ Lapse rate
³ Mesosphere
³ Ocean current
³ Orographic
³ Precipitation
³ Radiation
³ Stratosphere
³ Thermosphere
³ Troposphere
2.2.1 Earth and Atmosphere
What is atmosphere? How do you explain the importance of atmosphere for 
human beings or for all life forms?
The air that surrounds the earth is called the atmosphere. It is an envelope of 
transparent colorless, tasteless and odorless gases found above the earth’s surface. 
Composition of the Atmosphere 
The earth’s atmosphere is a mixture of gases, suspended dust particles and 
condensed moisture droplets which are collectively known as aerosols. The 
gases are different in their volume. 
Table 2.3: Gases of Earth’s atmosphere
Major gases Minor gases Rare gases
Nitrogen 78% Argon 0.93% Hydrogen, ozone, methane, 
neon, helium, krypton , 
Oxygen 20.95% Carbon dioxide 0.03% xenon, carbon monoxide
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 67
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
Activity 2.9
In your geography work group, perform the following task and answer the following 
questions. 
1 Is carbon dioxide useful? If yes, how? 
2 Why are carbon dioxide, oxygen, and ozone important to the earth’s organisms? 
3 How could plants or agricultural crops and animals in your locality be affected 
by the atmosphere? 
Structure of the Atmosphere 
The earth’s atmosphere is divided into four layers based on temperature 
variation. They are troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere and thermosphere (see 
Figure 2.26). 
 
 
Figure 2.26 Vertical structure of the atmosphere
Exosphere 1000
Temperature in o
C
Altitude in Kms
-100 -90-80-70-60-50-40-30-20-10 0 10 20
600
500
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Ionosphere
Thermosphere
Mesopause
Mesosphere
Highest
concentration
of ozone
Stratosphere
Tropopause
Stratopause
Mt. Everest Troposphere Jet Streams
Grade 9 Geography 68
2.2 Weather And Climate
Table 2.4: Atmosphere layers and their characters
Name of the 
layer Average height Major characteristics
Troposphere Extends from sea 
level to 8/16 kms 
F Contains 75% of the atmospheric mass. 
F Uniformly, temperature decreases with 
an increase of altitude. 
F The top boundary is known as the 
tropopause, which is characterized by 
jet streams (high velocity winds). 
Stratosphere Extends up ward 
to 50 kilometres
F Has constant temperature. 
F High concentration of ozone gases. 
F Its upper limit is called the stratopause.
Mesosphere 
Extends from 
50 to 80/85 
kilometres
F It is the coldest part of the atmosphere. 
F Its upper surface is known as the 
mesopause. 
F Temperature decreases to nearly 
–100o
C at the top of the mesosphere. 
F Meteorites burn and disintegrate 
because of friction here. 
Thermosphere 
F Ionospheres 
F exosphere 
Extends from 
80/85 kilometres 
upward into 
space 
F Have extremely low density 
F Very little heat can be absorbed, held or 
conducted. 
F Temperature rises as high as 1200o
C. 
F The ionosphere is a layer of electrically 
charged particles. These electrons and 
ions are useful for communication 
because they reflect radio waves. 
F The exosphere begins at an altitude 
of about 500 to 700 kilometres above 
the earth’s surface and extends to 
interplanetary space.
Activity 2.10
Discuss the following issue and questions in pairs. 
1 The main characteristics of the layers of the atmosphere. 
2 Which layer of the atmosphere contains ozones? Discuss the use of ozone gas. 
3 What is the coldest layer of the atmosphere?
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 69
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
2.2.2 Meaning of Weather and Climate 
What is the condition of the atmosphere today? What is weather? What is 
climate? How is climate different from weather?
Weather is the condition of the atmosphere over a short period of time. Weather 
includes daily changes in precipitation, air pressure, temperature, wind, etc. 
Weather refers to atmospheric conditions in a given location. 
What is the weather like in your locality today? 
Climate is the average of all weather conditions of an area over a long period of 
time. These conditions include average temperature, air pressure, humidity, 
and days of sunshine for a period of 30 years. Climate tells us what it is usually 
like in the place where we live.
Major Elements of Weather and Climate
The major elements of weather and climate are temperature, rainfall, winds, 
air pressure, clouds, etc. You will learn more about these elements of weather 
and climate. 
Temperature 
What is temperature? 
Temperature is the amount of hotness or coldness of an object. The sun is the 
primary heat source for the earth and its atmosphere. The sun’s energy is called 
insolation or solar radiation, and this turns into heat energy at the earth’s surface. 
How is energy transferred in the atmosphere? 
Not all the energy that originates from the sun reaches the earth’s surface. 
Incoming Solar
Radiation 100%
Figure 2.27 Global modification 
of incoming solar radiation 
by atmospheric and surface 
processes
Grade 9 Geography 70
2.2 Weather And Climate
Heat transfer takes place in three ways. These are 
Â Radiation Â Conduction Â Convection 
Radiation is the transfer of energy from one body to another by means of 
electromagnetic waves. Energy transmitted from the sun reaches the earth’s 
surface through the process of radiation. Electromagnetic waves usually travel 
through empty space. When these electromagnetic waves come in contact with 
an object, they transfer the heat to that object. The sun warms the earth through 
radiation of electromagnetic waves.
 
Conduction refers to the transfer of heat through molecular contacts within and 
between bodies. Molecules are always in motion. The process of conduction is 
more important in solids. Air and water are poor conductors of heat. 
Convection is the transfer of heat due to differences in density. As gas or 
liquid either warms and rises or cools and falls, it creates convection currents. 
Convection is the method by which heat moves through gases or liquids. As gas 
or liquid is heated, it warms, expands and rises because it becomes less dense. 
When the gas or liquid cools it becomes dense and falls. Heat gained through 
radiation or conduction usually transfers by convection. 
Activity 2.11
In pairs, perform the following task and discuss the following questions. 
1 Explain weather and climate. 
2 How does energy in the atmosphere transfers? 
3 Why is convection the most important form of heat transfer in the atmosphere? 
4 Which method of heat transfer is the most important to bringing heat to the 
earth’s surface? 
Warm air rises; cold air
sinks due to convection
Air near the warm surface
is heated by conduction
 Radiant 
 energy
from sun
warms surface Figure 2.28 Solar 
energy reaches earth 
by radiation
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 71
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
Measuring and Recording Air Temperature 
What is the instrument that is used to measure temperatures? Explain how air 
temperature is measured and recorded? 
We measure temperature with thermometer. There are two types of thermometers: 
maximum and minimum thermometers. 
A maximum thermometer is a mercury-in-glass thermometer that has a 
constriction near the bulb end. When the temperature of air rises, the mercury in 
the thermometer expands and forces its way into the stem past this constriction. 
But when the bulb cools, none of the mercury above the constriction moves back 
into the bulb. Therefore, the length of the mercury in the stem remains the same. 
The end of the mercury thread, which is the farthest from the bulb, registers the 
highest temperature reached in a day. 
 
F The freezing point of mercury is –38.83o
C, and the boiling point is 
356.73 oC
F Alcohol freezes at a temperature of negative one hundred thirty degree 
Celsius (–130o
C)
A minimum thermometer has alcohol as its liquid, and it sets a metal index. 
When the temperature falls, the alcohol column drags the index towards the bulb 
end. When the temperature rises, the alcohol column expands and runs past the 
index without disturbing it. Thus, the end of the index, moves the farthest from the 
bulb and gives the lowest temperature attained in a day. Alcohol thermometers
may be used to measure temperatures from -130o
C (freezing point of alcohol) to 
785o
C (boiling point of alcohol). The standard thermometer for environmental 
measurements needs only to cover the range between -30o
C to 50o
C.
bulb glass tube mercury metal
index vacuum
capillary
metal
index
alcohol
Figure 2.29 The maximum and minimum thermometers
Grade 9 Geography 72
2.2 Weather And Climate
Maximum and minimum thermometers are kept in a box-like shelter which is 
known as a Stevenson screen.
The temperature of the air changes from time to time. Typically we measure 
the daily and annual variations. The changes between the highest and the 
lowest temperatures during 24 hours of a day is known as the daily march of 
temperature or the diurnal range. 
The changes of temperature from month to month within a year is known as the 
annual march of temperature. To describe this temperature variation, we have 
to use records for a long period of time. We use words like average and range to 
indicate the variations. 
Daily average (mean) temperature: is obtained by adding the maximum and 
minimum temperatures of a day and dividing the sum by two. 
Example 1: 
If the maximum daily temperature is 25o
C, and the minimum daily 
temperature is 5o
C, daily average temperature = 
25 5
2
15
o o C C o
C + = 
F Monthly average (mean) temperature is calculated by adding all daily 
averages and dividing the sum by the number of days of the month. 
F Annual average is obtained by adding the average monthly 
temperatures and dividing the sum by 12. 
F Daily (diurnal) range is the difference between the maximum and 
minimum temperature in a day. 
Figure 2.30 Stevenson screen
121 cm
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 73
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
Example 2:
If the maximum temperature is 25o
C, and the minimum temperature is 5o
C,
F Daily range = maximum – minimum = 25o
C – 5o
C = 20o
C.
F Annual range is the difference between the temperatures of the hottest 
and coldest months in a year. 
Example 3:
If the hottest month is 40o
C, and the coldest moth is – 10o
C, 
 Annual range = 40o
C −(−10o
C) = 50o
C
Table 2.5: Average annual temperature for Addis Ababa
Months J F M A M J J A S O N D
Annual Max.Temp (o
C) 23.3 24.3 24.8 24.2 24.4 22.8 20.6 20.6 21.3 22.3 22.6 22.8
Annual Min.Temp (o
C) 9 10.8 11.6 12 12.3 11.2 11.3 11.2 11 9.9 8.7 8.1
Activity 2.12
1 By referring to Table 2.5,
a Calculate annual range of temperature. 
b Calculate annual average (mean) temperature. 
c Convert the data into graphs
2 When do the maximum and minimum temperatures of the month occur in 
Ethiopia? Why? 
Rainfall 
What is rainfall? 
Rainfall is liquid precipitation. Any moisture that falls from the clouds towards 
the earth’s surface is called precipitation. Precipitation may occur in the form 
of rain, snow, hail, sleet and drizzle. Precipitation is part of the water cycle or 
hydrological cycle. The water cycle begins as water is changed from liquid to 
vapour by evaporation and transpiration of water vapour. Once water vapour is 
formed, it expands and cools. Then, condensation occurs, forming clouds, and 
the water falls as snow, sleet or rainfall. The whole process is powered by solar 
Grade 9 Geography 74
2.2 Weather And Climate
energy and is repeated continuously. This whole process is called the hydrological 
cycle.
F Evaporation is the process by which liquid water is converted into 
gases. 
F Transpiration is the transfer and change of water from plants to water 
vapour in the air. 
F Evapotranspiration is the combined loss of water through the process 
of evaporation and transpiration. 
F Condensation is the process by which vapour becomes liquid. 
F Sublimation is the process in which ice changes into water vapour 
without first becoming a liquid, and vice versa. 
Evaporation from
soil
Evaporation from
lakes, rivers, etc.
Moist air to 
continent
Evaporation from
ocean
Evaporation from
vegetation
Evaporation from falling
To ocean
Condensation
Ocean
Lake
Land
Groundwater
to lakes
Condensation and precipitation
Groundwater to rivers
and oceans
Figure 2.31 The hydrological cycle
Absorbs heat
Water (liquid) Ice (solid)
Absorbs heat Absorbs heat
Releases heat Releases heat
Releases heat
Water vapor
(gas)
Figure 2.32 Water exists in three forms
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 75
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
Water is a unique substance, because it can exist in three states as liquid, solid 
and gas) in the atmosphere. Water either absorbs or releases heat when changes 
from one state to another (see Figure 2.32).
Types of rainfall
What are the types of rainfall? Explain their formation. 
Rain is given three different names according to the different ways in which 
moisture is forced to rise. They are: 
Â Convectional rainfall 
Â Orographic or relief rainfall 
Â Cyclonic rainfall 
1 Convectional rainfall: When 
the ground surface is heated by 
the sun, the air above it is warmed 
up. At high altitudes, the water 
vapour cools, condenses to form 
clouds and falls as rain. This type 
of rainfall is common in humid 
areas where temperature is high 
throughout the year. 
2 Orographic (relief) rainfall: occurs when moist air is forced to rise over 
mountains. As it rises, it cools, then condenses and falls as rain. Almost all 
orographic rainfall falls on the windward side of mountains. 
Figure 2.33 Convectional rainfall
Prevailing
wind
Moist, warm
air rises
Rainy
windward
slope
Dry
leeward
slope RAIN SHADOW
Cool air depleted
of moisture sinks
and warms; relative
humidity decreases
Ocean
Moisture condenses
as air cools; relative 
humidity increases
Figure 2.34 Orographic (relief) type of rainfall
Grade 9 Geography 76
2.2 Weather And Climate
3 Cyclonic or Frontal rainfall when two air masses (warm and cold) meet, 
they do not mix freely with each other. They remain separated with a 
boundary surface between them. The warmer and less dense air is forced 
to rise over the colder and heavier air. As the warmer air rises, it cools 
and condenses. Then clouds form and rain falls. The place where warm air 
and cold air meet is called a front. Frontal rainfall is very common in the 
middle and high latitudes (60o
 north and south from the equator).
 
Measuring and Recording Rainfall
Rainfall is measured using an instrument called rain gauge. A rain gauge 
consists of a wide-mouthed funnel placed over a cylindrical container. Rain water 
passes through the funnel into the container below. The water in the container is 
poured into a measuring cylinder, and then the amount of rainfall is measured in 
millimeters and is recorded. 
Cold air Warm air
Frontal boundary
Figure 2.35 Cyclonic/frontal rainfall
Funel
Jar Metal 
container sunk 
in the ground
Figure 2.36 A rain gauge
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 77
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
Activity 2.13
Table 2.6: Rainfall data for Debre Markos
Months J F M A M J J A S O N D
Rainfall (mm) 18.3 12.1 57.5 55.1 173.1 113 256.5 293.8 210.8 12 91 9.4
Using the preceding rainfall data for the Debre Markos station, perform the following 
tasks. 
1 Calculate the total annual rainfall 
2 Identify the season of heaviest rainfall. 
3 Draw a line graph to illustrate each monthly total rainfall. 
Air Pressure 
What is air pressure? Explain how to record and measure pressure? 
The air around us has weight. This weight exerts pressure on the surface of the 
earth. We call this atmospheric pressure. Atmospheric pressure is not the same all 
over the earth, and it is not the same even in one place all the time. 
Pressure is measured by a mercury barometer. Normal pressure, at sea level, is 
about 760 mm/1013 mb.
The distribution of pressure over the earth’s surface depends on (1) the altitude
of places above sea level and, (2) most importantly, on temperature. 
Pressure decreases with an increase in altitude. This explains why air pressure is 
highest at sea level and decreases with increasing altitude. 
Vacuum
Mercury column
Glass tube
91 cm
Height
Air pressure
Air pressure
Mercury Figure 2.37 Mercury Barometer in dish
Grade 9 Geography 78
2.2 Weather And Climate
High temperature makes air expand, so that it has a lower density and pressure. 
Low temperature makes the air to contract, resulting in a higher density and 
creating an area of high pressure. 
The distribution of air pressure over the globe is known as the horizontal 
distribution of pressure. Pressure distribution can be shown on a map. Lines 
connecting all places that have the same pressure are called isobars. 
Focus 
Global Pressure Belts:
1 Equatorial low pressure belt (Doldrums):
F Located from 5o
 North to 5o
 South. 
F There is tremendous heat, and thus warm air, creating low 
pressure. Also, the centrifugal force is very high at the equator, 
because the earth’s velocity of rotation is high. Hence, the air 
masses tend to be thrown outwards, resulting in low pressure. 
F Wind speed is low, that is why this pressure belt is called the 
doldrums (Belt of Calm).
2 Tropical high pressure belt (Horse Latitude): 
F Located from 30o
 to 35o
 North and South.
F Except for two months, temperature is usually high.
F Here the pressure is high, because pressure depends on the 
rotation and movement of air (as winds from the Doldrums rise up 
and accumulate here. Also winds from the sub-polar low pressure 
belt accumulate here).
3 Sub-polar low pressure belt:
F Located from 60o
 to 65o
, North and South.
Figure 2.38 Air pressure belts
Equatorial Low (Doldrum)
Subtropical high
Polar high
Subtropical high
Polar high 90oN
90oS
60oN
60oS
60oN
60oS
30oN
30oS
30oN
30oS
0
0 o
o
Subpolar low
Subpolar low
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 79
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
F Here the low pressure is created because of intense high 
pressure at the poles.
4 Polar Highs
F Located near the north and south poles.
F The polar zones have permanent centers of high pressure 
known as polar highs. 
The pressure distribution over the earth’s surface is not a continuous belt. Except 
in the higher latitude of the southern hemisphere, they form belts due to the small 
land areas which do not affect the free flow of the atmosphere. However the 
position of the pressure belts and cells does not remain fixed in one position. 
They move north or south with the apparent movement of the sun.
During the northern hemisphere’s summer, the sun is overhead north of the 
equator. The pressure belts then shift northward by a few degrees from their 
average position. During the southern hemisphere’s summer, the sun is overhead 
south of the equator. As a result, the pressure belts move southward by a few 
degrees from their average position. 
Activity 2.14
In your geography work group, answer the following questions. 
1 What is atmospheric pressure? 
2 Why does pressure decrease as there is an increase in altitude? 
3 What effect does temperature have on atmospheric pressure? 
Wind
What is wind? 
Wind is air in horizontal motion. Winds have speed and direction. Wind force 
(speed) and wind direction are affected by 
F Pressure gradient 
F Frictional force 
F Coriolis force 
On weather maps, pressure is indicated by drawing isolines of pressure, called 
isobars. The difference in distance between Isobars is called the pressure gradient. 
If the isobars are closely spaced, we can expect the pressure gradient force to be 
Grade 9 Geography 80
2.2 Weather And Climate
great, and wind speed to be high. In areas where the isobars are spaced widely 
apart the pressure gradient is low and light winds normally exist. High speed 
winds develop in areas where isobars are closer. 
Strong winds are danger for aviation, sailors, and tall structures such as towers, 
masts and cranes. Winds also affect different homes in different ways depending 
on their design and location. The wind can collapse windows and doors, rip off 
roof sheeting and destroy gables and walls. 
Regarding wind erosion, the speed and direction of the wind are directly related 
to the extent of soil erosion. Soil moisture levels can be very low at the surface of 
excessively drained soils, thus releasing soil particles to be transported by wind. 
This condition negatively affects the fertility of the soil, which reduced the yield 
of crop production. 
Deflection of Winds Due to the Earth’s Rotation
Because of the earth’s rotation, the direction of wind blow may not be at right 
angles to wind isobars, but rather at slanting angles to them. This deflection is 
caused by friction. The speed of wind also affects the amount of deflection. The 
force which affects the direction of movements of winds is called the “Coriolis 
force.’’ The deflection is to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left 
in the Southern Hemisphere.
Near the ground, where the winds are slowed by friction, the air blows at an acute 
angle toward areas of low pressure, forming great gyres creating cyclones and 
Figure 2.39 shows that, thicker arrows 
represent relatively faster winds. 
Wind speed is often measured with 
animometer.
Winds are named according to the 
compass direction of their source. 
Wind direction is measured as the 
direction from where wind comes. 
For example, a southerly wind comes 
from the south and blows to the 
north. Direction is measured by an 
Figure 2.39 Association between wind instrument called wind vane. 
speed and distance between isobars 
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 81
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
anticyclones. In the Northern Hemisphere, the Coriolis force causes air in lowpressure areas to spiral counter clockwise and inward, forming a cyclone, whereas 
air in high-pressure areas spirals clockwise and outward, forming an anticyclone. 
In the Southern Hemisphere, cyclones turn clockwise and anticyclones, counter 
clockwise.
Focus 
Cyclones are atmospheric disturbances which involve a closed circulation 
about a low-pressure center. They move inward, anticlockwise, in the 
Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere. 
Cyclones are commonly known as lows or low pressure areas. 
Anti-cyclones are vast areas of high pressure which have a diverging 
system of surface winds. The winds in anti-cyclones blow outward in the 
anti-clockwise direction in the Southern Hemisphere and in the clockwise 
direction in the Northern Hemisphere. 
Anticyclones are commonly called highs or high pressure areas. 
Types of Winds 
There are three types of surface winds. They are: 
F planetary F monsoon F local winds. 
Planetary winds and their relationship with pressure belts: Planetary winds 
blow over large areas of the earth’s surface. They are closely associated with 
Anti clock wise
Anti clock wise
Clock wise
Clock wise
Figure 2.40 Cyclones and anticyclones
Grade 9 Geography 82
2.2 Weather And Climate
the world pressure belts. Winds blow from areas of high pressure to areas of 
low pressure. The most common planetary winds are trade winds, westerlies 
and polar easterlies. They have wide influence over the earth’s surface (see
Figure 2.41). 
Monsoon winds: They are seasonal winds whose movements are controlled by 
pressure that differs during different seasons. 
Monsoon winds are very common in South and South East Asia. Seasonal 
changes in the direction of these winds are caused by the unequal heating of land 
and water surfaces. The direction of monsoon winds changes between summer 
and winter. 
 
Polar easterlies
Polar easterlies
Westerlies
Westerlies
Polar high
Polar high
60o
60o
30o
30o
0o
Polar front
Polar front
Horse latitudes NE 
trade winds
SE 
trade winds
Horse latitudes
Doldrums
Figure 2.41 Pattern of global wind belts
Figure 2.42 Monsoon winds
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 83
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
Local winds: They affect only limited areas and blow for a short period of time. 
They affect climate conditions on a small scale. Local winds are caused by the 
nature of the physical features of the area. The main local winds are: 
Â Land and sea breezes 
Â Mountain and valley breezes 
1 Land and sea breezes: These winds are common along coastal areas. These 
winds change their directions daily and affect very small areas. During the 
daytime, temperature on the land is higher than on the water/sea. So low 
pressure is formed on the land, while it is relatively high on the sea. Wind 
blows from the sea towards the land. This is known as a sea breeze. At 
night the land is colder than the sea. So low pressure develops over the sea. 
The wind blows from land towards the sea. This is known as a land breeze. 
2 Mountain and valley breezes: Mountain and valley breezes arise from 
contrasts in temperature between a valley floor and mountain slopes. 
During the day the air at the bottom of the valley becomes warmer. As a 
Figure 2.43 Daytime and nighttime development of sea breeze 
and land breezes
Grade 9 Geography 84
2.2 Weather And Climate
result it expands and rises along the mountain slopes. This is known as a 
valley breeze. 
At night the wind over the slope of the mountain becomes cool. Then this cooler 
and heavier mountain air slides down slopes towards the valley. This is called a 
mountain breeze. 
Clouds
What are clouds? How are clouds formed? What are the major types of clouds? 
A cloud is a dense concentration of very fine invisible water droplets, sleet or 
ice crystals. Clouds are formed by the condensation of water vapour below the 
dew point in the atmosphere. There are varieties of clouds, based on their height, 
appearance and shape. 
Figure 2.44 Daytime and nighttime development of valley breezes 
and mountain breezes
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 85
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
Table 2.7: Types of clouds 
Group Cloud type Description
High clouds 
> 6000 m
Cirrostratus Thin, wispy, appears in sheets. 
Cirrus Thin, wispy, filamentous or curly, mostly 
composed of ice crystals. 
Cirrocumulus Small, puffy, patchy and/or with a wave-like 
appearance.
Middle clouds 
2000 – 6000 m
Alto cumulus Medium-sized, puffy, patchy, scattered clouds 
– often in linear bands. 
Alto stratus Thin and uniform.
Low clouds 
< 2000 m
Stratocumulus Broad and flat on the bottom, puffy on the top. 
Stratus Uniform, flat thick to thin layered clouds. 
Mostly composed of liquid droplets. 
Nimbostratus 
Uniform, dark, flat, low clouds that produce 
precipitation. 
Mostly composed of liquid droplets.
Vertical clouds
< 500 and > 18000 m
Cumulus Puffy and piled up.
Cumulonimbus Can cause lightning, hail, strong rains, strong 
winds and tornados.
Source: Focus on Earth science
Cirrostratus
Cumulonimbus
Altostratus
Altocumulus
Cumulus
Stratocumulus
Stratus
Nimbostratus
4000 m
2000 m
6000 m
Figure 2.45 Diagram of cloud types
Grade 9 Geography 86
2.2 Weather And Climate
Activity 2.15
In your group, perform the following tasks and answer the following questions. 
1 What are the major controlling factors responsible for the direction and speed 
of winds? 
2 What is the difference between cyclones and anticyclones? 
3 What are the effects of sea breezes and land breezes in a given locality? 
4 Compare and contrast the characteristics and formation of monsoon winds 
and local winds. 
5 Discuss the basic characteristics of planetary winds. 
Controls of Weather and Climate 
What are the major controls of weather and climate? 
The energy that the earth receives from the sun is not distributed evenly. Many 
factors affect the distribution. These include latitude, altitude, distance from 
the sea, cloud cover, ocean current, planetary winds and pressure.
Latitude 
What is latitude? What is the 
effect of latitude on temperature?
On a global scale, latitude is the 
most important factor determining 
the strength of heat reaching the 
earth’s surface. When the sun’s 
rays are vertical (at a right angle) 
to the surface, the amount of heat 
received is the greatest. But when 
the sun’s rays are slanting (oblique) 
the heat’s strength decreases. 
At the equator, the overhead sun is high and of high intensity insolation is 
received. At the poles, the overhead sun is low, so the amount of insolation is low. 
The sun is overhead at noon for six months between the equator and the Tropic 
of Cancer, and it is overhead for another six months between the equator and the 
Tropic of Capricorn.
The sun is directly overhead at the Tropic of Cancer on June 21 (the June 
solstice). The sun is directly overhead at the Tropic of Capricorn on December 21 
(the December solstice). At March and September equinoxes, the sun is directly 
overhead at the equator. At times between solstices and equinoxes, the sun is 
Figure 2.46 Angle of the sun 
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 87
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
overhead in tropical areas in the zone between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic 
of Capricorn. The sun passes directly over every tropical place twice a year: once 
as the sun moves from being overhead at the equator to being overhead at the 
tropic and then again on the return from the tropic to the equator. The sun is never 
overhead outside of the tropics. The sun is closer to overhead in the middle and 
high latitudes on the day of their hemisphere’s summer solstice.
Altitude
Do you know how to compute temperature change with altitude?
Air temperature decreases with increasing altitude. The normal decrease of 
temperature with height is 6.4o
C per 1000 m. This is known as the normal lapse 
rate. The normal lapse rate is the average rate or proportion at which temperature 
changes per unit of altitudinal change. The highland areas of Ethiopia are good 
examples of places that demonstrate the effect of altitude on temperature. 
Example: If the altitude of the given mountain is 4070 m above sea level and 
the temperature at sea level is 20o
C. What will be the expected temperature 
at the top of the mountain?
Solution: At normal lapse rate temperature decreases 6.4o
C per 1000 m
 Altitude of mountain = 4070 m
 Therefore, the temperature at the top of the mountain = 20o
C – 26.05o
C = - 6.05o
C
Distance from the Sea
How distance from the sea affects the 
distribution of temperature over the 
surface of the earth? 
Land heats more quickly than water. 
But it loses its heat quicker than water. 
This is because of the transparency of 
water reflections from water surfaces, 
evaporation, mixing and currents in 
water. All these conditions result in 
greater and more rapid temperature 
changes on land than in the seas. 
Therefore coastal regions are cooler 
than inland regions.
o 1000 m = 6.4 C
4070 m = ?
4070 m o ×6.4 C
1000 m
o = 26.048 C
Figure 2.47: Distance from the sea 
Grade 9 Geography 88
2.2 Weather And Climate
In winter in mid latitudes, the ocean surface is much warmer than land areas. 
So onshore wind brings heat to coastal lands. During the summer, coastal areas 
remain much cooler than inland sites. 
Cloud Cover
What is cloud? How cloud affects temperature?
Cloud reduces the amount of solar radiation reaching the earth’s surface and the 
amount of radiation reflected from the earth’s surface. When there are no clouds 
both types of radiation will be at a maximum level. 
Ocean Current
What is ocean current? How ocean current affects the distribution of temperature? 
Ocean current is the horizontal movement of ocean waters caused by winds and 
differences in temperature. The effect of ocean currents on temperatures depends 
upon whether the current is cold or warm. 
The water at the equator is warmer and less dense than that in polar areas. 
Convection currents in the oceans result in a pole ward flow of warm, light,surface 
water. Compensating heavy cold water flows through the ocean depths towards 
the equator. 
Ocean currents are the source of temperature regulation on the earth. Ocean 
currents change the temperature of a particular region. A warm ocean current 
makes the weather of the nearby regions to go up in temperature, whereas cold 
West 
Australian
Current
Gulf Stream
Sargasso
 Sea
Labrador
Current
East Greenland
Current North Atlantic 
Drift
Norway
Current
North Atlantic Brazil Current
Agulhas
Current
Mozambique
Current
Falkland Current
Peru Current
East Australian 
 Current
West Wind Drift West Wind Drift
South Paciic Equatorial Current
Japan
Current
Alaska
California crrent
Current
Equatorial Counter Current
North Paciic Equatorial Current
North Paciic 
 Drift
Figure 2.48: Ocean currents of the world
Key
 Warm ocean current
 Cold ocean current
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 89
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.2 Weather And Climate
ocean currents reduce the surrounding temperature. For instance, the European 
coasts get warmth from the ocean current of the Mexican Gulf stream, and 
southwestern Africa’s Namib Desert is cooled by the Benguela current off the 
continent’s western coast. 
The currents also play major roles in determining the global geography of 
precipitation. The sun can more easily evaporate warm water than cold water 
and thereby produce the atmospheric vapor that results in rain. Therefore, land 
impacted by warm currents tends to have abundant precipitation in addition to a 
comparatively warm climate. In contrast, land impacted by cold currents tends to 
receive very little precipitation in addition to having a comparatively cool climate. 
Winds 
What is wind? What is the effect of wind on temperature?
Winds indirectly change the temperature of places near the sea according to 
the areas from which they blow. There are two ways by which distribution of 
temperature is influenced by winds. 
1 Winds carry the temperature from one place to another. 
2 Winds blow the surface layers of a body of water in the direction of their 
flow.
In this way, the winds have the effect 
of raising the temperature of the shore 
towards which the wind is blowing 
and lowering the temperature of the 
opposite shore. 
Activity 2.16
In your group, perform the following task and answer the following questions. 
1 Which area of the world receives the overhead sun (the sun’s rays at a right 
angle)? 
2 Why does temperature decrease with increase in altitude? 
3 In what ways do ocean currents change temperature? 
4 Why do average temperatures fall as you move from the tropics to the poles? 
5 What would be the temperature be at the top of mountain Ras Dashen assuming 
that the temperature at sea level is 30o
C? 
Note 
In temperate zones, winds that blow from 
the land lower winter temperatures, but raise 
summer temperatures. Winds blowing from 
the sea lower summer temperatures, but 
raise winter temperatures.
Grade 9 Geography 90
2.2 Weather And Climate
 Exercise 2.2
I Determine whether each of the sentences below is True or 
False.
1 Air pressure increases with altitude. 
2 Compared to warm air, cold air is more dense for a given volume.
3 Winds blow away from the center of high pressure. 
4 Winds that blow in opposite directions in different seasons because of the 
differential heating of the land and oceans are called monsoons. 
II Choose the correct answer. 
5 Almost all of the energy reaching the earth from the sun is in the form of 
_________.
A gamma rays
B ultraviolet ray
C atomic particles
D electromagnetic waves 
6 The process by which ice changes directly into water vapor is referred to as 
A Conduction
B Sublimation
C Condensation
D All 
7 The instrument used to measure wind speed is _________. 
A Barometer
B Windvane
C Animometer
D Thermometer
8 Ocean currents influence temperature by 
A eroding shorelines 
B washing warm, dry sediments out to sea 
C heating or cooling the air
D dispersing the rays of the sun
9 At the equator, the sun’s rays always strike the earth 
A at a low angle
B 18 hours each day
C at nearly 90° angle
D no more than 8 hours each day
III Complete each of the following sentences with the correct word 
or phrase. 
10 Atmospheric pressure is measured with a ________.
11 Ozone within the atmosphere protects us from ________.
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 91
2.2 Weather And Climate 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
12 Jet streams occur in the layer of the atmosphere called the ________.
13 We live in the layer of the atmosphere called the ________.
14 The abundant gases in the atmosphere are ________ and ________.
2.3 NATURAL REGIONS OF THE EARTH
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Þ analyse the concept of region and regional study; 
Þ demonstrate temperature zones of the world; 
Þ discuss the major characteristics of a tropical zone; 
Þ state the general characteristics of the equatorial rainforest and hot 
deserts; 
Þ distinguish the major sub regions of the tropical zone; 
Þ explain the major relief features of Ethiopia; 
Þ assess the major characteristics of the temperate zone and sub-regions; 
Þ describe the general characteristics of the Mediterranean region; 
Þ explain the general characteristics of a coniferous region; 
Þ recognize the major characteristics of the frigid zone; and 
Þ differentiate the general characteristics of tundra and the polar ice caps. 
Key Terms
³ Altitude
³ Conifer
³ Deserts
³ Environment
³ Forest
³ Laterite
³ Latitude
³ Liana
³ Rayon
³ Relief
³ Region 
³ Savanna
³ Tundra
³ Twilight
³ Xerophyte
The Concept of Region and Regional Studies 
What is a region? What are the major human activities in your locality? Can 
you identify the natural features of your locality?
A region is a part of the earth’s surface which has similar physical elements and 
to some extent similar human activities. The earth provides many environments 
that vary in natural elements, such as relief, climate, vegetation, soil, etc. A region 
can be natural or human-made, can be small or large, and does not have a clear 
boundary. 
Grade 9 Geography 92
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
To study the different ways of life of all the peoples of the world, one by one, 
would be very difficult. We have a method by which we can study the different 
geographical environments of the earth through peoples’ social and economic 
activities. This is what we call a regional study.
The regions we are going to learn about are based on the physical elements of 
climate, vegetation, human activities, etc.
Major Natural Regions of the Earth
What is a natural region? Are all environments similar? What makes them 
different? 
Different environments result in differences in human activities, population 
distribution and economic development. Mostly, natural regions are named after 
the dominant vegetation found in them. But their division is based on climate. 
The earth can be divided into three major temperature zones. These are: 
Â Tropical (hot) zone.
Â Temperate zone.
Â Frigid (cold) zone.
Tropical Zone
Frigid Zone
Frigid Zone
Tropical Zone
Equator
South
Temperate Zone
North
Temperate Zone
Figure 2.49 Temperature zones of the earth
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 93
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Within each zone, there is a great deal of variation. Each zone can be divided into 
a number of sub-regions.
I Tropical (Hot) Zone
What is the location of Tropical zone? Explain the general characteristics of 
temperature? 
The tropical or hot zone is the zone between the Tropic of Cancer (23½o
N) and 
Tropic of Capricorn (23½o
S).
The tropical zone is characterized by high temperature throughout the year. The 
annual average temperature is above 20o
C, which decreases polewards from the 
equator. Rainfall decreases and becomes seasonal as one moves away from the 
equator. Along the equator there is dense forest which gradually changes with 
distance from the equator, to savanna grassland, semi-desert vegetation and true 
desert vegetation. Agriculture and mining are the major economic activities of 
the zone. 
The tropical zone is divided into four sub-regions. These are: 
F the equatorial rainforest region
F the savanna grassland region
F the desert region 
F the tropical monsoon land.
Equatorial Rainforest
Tropic of cancer
Equator
Tropic of capricorn
Hot Deserts Monsoon
Tropical Grasslands
Figure 2.50 Natural regions of the tropical zone
Grade 9 Geography 94
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Activity 2.17
Study Figure 2.50 and then perform the following tasks and answer the questions 
below.
1 List countries where equatorial rainforests are found.
2 Which continent has the largest desert?
3 What countries have the largest areas of tropical grassland or savanna?
Two sample sub regions are treated in detail below. 
A The Equatorial Rainforest Region
What is the location of equatorial rainforest region? What are the major areas 
of the equatorial rain forest region? 
Location
They are found in the lowland areas within 6o
 north and south of the equator. The 
main areas in the world include.
F The Amazon Basin
F The Congo Basin
F Southern Malaysia and some Indonesian islands
The equatorial rainforest region does not form a continuous belt around the earth. 
It is broken by high altitudes in East Africa and South America. The Amazon 
Basin is the most extensive area.
 Key
Figure 2.51 Distribution of Equatorial rainforest Region
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 95
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Climate 
Equatorial rainforest region has uniformly high temperature and heavy rainfall 
throughout the year. The mean annual temperature is about 27o
C, and the annual 
range of temperature is less than 3o
C. But the daily range is greater than the 
annual range of temperature. Rainfall in this region is mainly of a convectional 
type which falls every day, usually in the afternoon. The total annual rainfall is 
very high, usually between 1500 mm and 2500 mm. All months have rainfall 
with a small variation in amount. 
Activity 2.18
Study Table 2.8 and answer the questions and perform the task that follow it.
Table 2.8: Mean monthly temperatures and mean monthly rainfall of Singapore
Month J F M A M J J A S O N D
Temp oC 27 27 27 28 28 27 27 27 27 27 27 27
R.F (cm) 251 188 188 193 170 173 173 201 173 206 251 269
Singapore is located 1o
 north of the equator.
1 What is the mean annual temperature of Singapore?
2 What is the annual range of temperature of Singapore?
3 What is the total annual rainfall of Singapore?
4 In which month is the highest rainfall received?
5 Plot line and bar graphs showing temperature and rainfall of Singapore 
respectively.
Natural Vegetation
The region has dense, tall, broad-leafed and evergreen trees. The high temperature 
and abundant moisture of this region makes plants growth continuous. The ground 
is covered with tropical rainforest, the most luxuriant type of natural vegetation 
in the world. Most of the trees are hardwood, such as rosewood, ebony, and 
mahogany, which are valuable for making durable furniture.
Grade 9 Geography 96
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
There are three layers in the forest:
1 The top layer: This is made of giant trees, often over 50 m high. They do 
not grow close together. They have very few branches except at the top.
2 The middle layer: This is made of the trees that are from 20 m to 40 m 
high. It is the main part of the forest.
3 The lower layer: This is made of the smaller, younger trees. In time, these 
grow and take the place of the larger trees.
Trees are closely spaced and interlaced with climbing vines called lianas. There 
are as many as about 3,000 species within a few square kilometres.
 
Wild Animals 
The Equatorial rainforest is inhabited by varieties of animals, such as insects, 
birds, reptiles, mammals. Most mammals are arboreal. They are small in size and 
are tree climbing, example apes, monkeys, bats, squirrels, etc. 
Water body animals, such as crocodiles, alligators, hippopotamuses, fish, etc, are 
also available. 
Upper Canopy:
30 to 50 m
Densest Layer:
Lianas and Epiphytes
Thinnest Layer:
Forest Floor
Figure 2.52 Vertical stratification of a rainforest
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 97
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Activity 2.19
In pairs, discuss the following questions. 
1 Why is the equatorial rainforest covered with thick evergreen forest?
2 What are the major characteristics of the climate of the equatorial rainforest?
3 What are the major animals in equatorial rainforest? 
Human Activities 
What are the major economic activities in the equatorial rain forest region? 
The human activities found in equatorial rainforests include primitive hunting 
and gathering, shifting cultivation, plantation agriculture, and mining.
Hunting and gathering: Many of the people of the equatorial rainforest region 
lead a simple and primitive way of life. The forest vegetation provides them with 
food in variety, if not in abundance. They also hunt animals and fish from the 
rivers.
Shifting cultivation: This is more advanced than hunting and gathering, and it 
provides people with a continuous food supply. An area of forest is cleared to 
create a small plot of land which is cultivated until the soil becomes exhausted. 
The plot is then abandoned and a new area is cleared. This is a threat for this 
region in the long run. Frequently the cultivators work in a circular pattern, 
returning to previously used land once the natural fertility of the soil has been 
renewed.
Shifting cultivation is, a simple form of agriculture based on the shifting of plots 
after two or more years.
This type of agriculture is practiced in equatorial rainforests because of the nature 
of the soil. The soil of the region lacks valuable mineral nutrients which resulted 
from excessive leaching. Such leached soil is called laterite.
Grade 9 Geography 98
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Activity 2.20
1 In a small groups work the following. Find and read articles written in 
newspapers or magazines about:
a plantation 
b mining in Ethiopia; and share the information with your group. 
In pairs, discuss the following questions. 
2 What is the advantage of the practice of shifting cultivation?
3 What is the threat in the long run caused by shifting cultivation?
Plantation agriculture: is a large scale production of one or two crops for sale. It 
is based on modern techniques of production. It was first introduced to the region 
by Europeans during the colonial period. Plantation agriculture is characterized by:
F Large-scale holdings, which draw most of their labor supply from the 
local inhabitants.
F The production of a single crop (mono culture)
F Heavy investment in processing plant, railway, shipment facilities, etc.
The most important crops grown in the plantations of the equatorial rainforest 
region include rubber, palm oil, jute, bananas, pineapples, cocoa, sugarcane, etc.
There are a number of areas that produce commodities for export. For example, 
nearly half of the world cacao production comes from Ghana.
Rubber is one of the main plantation crops in Malaysia, Indonesia and Congo. 
The Amazon basin supplies only a very small amount of the world’s rubber.
Mining: is the extraction of mineral-bearing substances from the earth’s crust. 
The equatorial rainforest region is a source of useful minerals. Bauxite (an ore 
of aluminium) is found in Ghana, Guyana and Venezuela. Petroleum is found in 
Nigeria, Venezuela, and Indonesia. Iron ore is found in Liberia.
B Tropical Deserts 
What is a desert? Where are the major tropical hot deserts? How were tropical 
deserts formed? What are the major characteristics of hot deserts?
Location
Deserts are almost barren lands. The tropical hot deserts are located between 15o
to 30o
 north and south latitudes of the equator. The largest hot desert is the Sahara 
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 99
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Desert. There are also other important deserts such as the Kalahari, Atacama, 
Colorado, Arabia, Thar and Australian deserts. Deserts are formed due to their 
location 
F in the trade-wind belts
F on the leeward side of high mountains 
F in the interior of continents
F along cool ocean currents
Most deserts arise due to atmospheric wind conditions. Warm air masses create 
two belts of desert, one along the Tropic of Cancer and the other along the Tropic 
of Capricorn. Other deserts result from the effects of ocean currents on land 
masses, where cool air masses carry fog and moist, but little rain, along coastal 
regions.
Deserts are located on the western margins of continents, except for the Sahara 
Desert, which is in North Africa and extends to the northeastern coast of the 
African continent.
Climate 
The main characteristics of desert is that the climate is hot throughout the year, 
and there is very low and unreliable rainfall (not more than 250 mm per year).
Temperature ranges from 25o
C to 40o
C or above during the daytime, and they can 
fall even below 0o
C during the night, due to the absence of clouds. The winds 
are warm and dry.
Paciic
Ocean
Colorado
Atacama
Sahra
Calahari 
and Namib
Arabia
Thar
Australian
desert
Atlantic
Ocean
Atlantic Ocean
Indian 
Ocean
ANTARCTICA
AUSTRALIA
EUROPE ASIA NORTH
AMERICA
SOUTH
AMERICA
AFRICA
Figure 2.53 Tropical desert regions
Grade 9 Geography 100
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
The following graph for 
Baghdad, Iraq shows the annual 
average weather condition 
readings covering rain, monthly 
average, maximum and 
minimum temperatures.
Vegetation
The climate of the hot desert is not favourable for plant growth. However, there are 
some plants that have a special way of behaving or special features (adaptations) 
which enable them to survive. Plants in deserts have long roots, few or no leaves, 
hard bark and an oily leaf surface. These features help the plants to extract every 
drop of moisture from the soil and reduce the loss of water by evapotranspiration. 
These are called xerophytes. Xerophytes are woody and thorny plants, grasses 
and herbs, for example cacti.
Animal life 
Animals such as gazelle, hare, fox, snakes, lizards, etc are commonly available 
in the desert region. For the desert people camel is their best companion. It has 
special adaptations, which helps it to survive the desert. 
Human Activities: 
The major economic activities found in the hot deserts are pastoralism, crop 
cultivation and mining. 
Pastoralism is the grazing of animals. Many of the desert people practice a 
nomadic way of life. Nomads do not live in one area. They move with their 
animals from place to place looking for water and pasture. They keep animals 
like camels, sheep, goats, cattle, etc. Small-scale crop cultivation is possible 
along wadis (small streams) and in the oases; dates, vegetables, fruits and cereals 
are grown. In areas where the deserts are crossed by rivers, irrigation on a large 
scale is possible. The waters of the Nile, Tigris-Euphrates and Indus have made 
possible the cultivation of crops in desert areas.
Rainfall
10
20
30
50
40
0
Trmperature (Celsius) Rainfall (mm)
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
average monthly temperature (max)
average monthly temperature (min)
Figure 2.54 Climate graph 
for Baghdad (example of 
hot desert climate)
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 101
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Most deserts are important sources of minerals. The most important mineral is oil. 
The Middle East alone accounts for about 60% of the world’s total oil reserve.
Other minerals produced in hot deserts are nitrates and copper in the Atacama 
Desert, gold in the Australia Desert, diamond in the Kalahari, natural gas in the 
Sahara Desert and the Middle East, phosphate and iron ore in the northwest 
Sahara Desert. Therefore, mining is an important occupation in deserts.
Activity 2.21
In your group, discuss the following questions and perform the following tasks:
1 Why do deserts have very cold night and hot days?
2 Explain the three ways in which deserts are formed.
3 How plants have adapted to survive in deserts.
4 Why it is difficult to live in a hot deserts?
Case Study 1
Vertical Distribution of Climate in Ethiopia
Ethiopia lies within the tropics (3o
N to 15o
N latitude). It lies in a zone of 
maximum insolation where every place has overhead sun twice a year. However, 
as it is a highland country, tropical temperature conditions are not experienced 
everywhere. They are limited to the lowlands in the peripheries.
The traditional classification of climatic zones of Ethiopia is divided into five:
1 Bereha (hot arid): found below 500 m a.s.l., where the average annual 
temperature range is between 30o
C and 40o
C or higher.
2 Kola (warm to hot semiarid): It is a climate of hot lands with altitudinal 
ranges of 500 - 1,500 m a.s.l. Average temperature is between 20o
C – 30o
C. 
3 Weina dega (warm to cool semi-humid): This is a zone which covers the 
temperate highlands that fall in altitudinal ranges of 1,500 – 2,300 m a.s.l. 
Its average annual temperatures are between 15o
C and 20o
C.
4 Dega (cool to cold humid): This describes the cool temperate highlands with 
an altitude ranging from 2,300 – 3,300 m a.s.l. and average temperatures 
between 10o
C to 15o
C.
5 Wurch (cold moist temperature): It coincides with the Afro-alpine 
areas on the highest areas of the plateaus. The lower limit of the wurch 
Grade 9 Geography 102
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
zone, generally, coincides with the transition from coniferous forest to the 
vegetation dominated by Asta. This happens above 3,300 m.a.s.l. where 
Average temperature is below 10o
C.
F Though Ethiopia is a tropical country, its climate types range from 
desert to hot steppe, and from tropical savanna and rainforest to warm 
temperate cool highlands. Ethiopia is a multifaceted tropical country, 
because of the influence of altitude.
Case Study 2
Altitudinal Condition and Temperature Distribution of the Central 
African Republic
The Central African Republic (C.A.R.) 
is a landlocked country which lies in 
the heart of equatorial Africa. Most 
of its land is plateau that ranges with 
altititude from about 610 m to 792 m. 
Two ranges of hills in the north and 
northeast rise to maximum heights of 
about 1,402 m.
 
The Central African Republic is characterized by the tropical climate with hot 
dry winters and mild-to-hot wet summers. The average annual temperature is 
about 26°C. The average annual temperature ranges in Bangui are from 21o
C to 
29o
C, in July or August, to 21o
C to 34o
C in February. The northern part has a drier 
climate with temperatures reaching as high as 40o
C, and it is prone to harmattan 
(hot dusty) winds, and even to desertification. The temperature in the south is 
lower, as 30o
C during the day and 20o
C at night. These conditions are similar to 
those in Ethiopia’s western lowlands.
Though the C.A.R. gets a lot of rainfall (mostly in May-October), because of its 
altitude, it is not as hot and humid as many equatorial countries. 
Figure 2.55 Central African Republic
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 103
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Activity 2.22
In your group, perform the following tasks. 
1 Describe the differences and similarities in temperature distribution and 
altitudinal conditions between Ethiopia and the Central African Republic.
2 Examine the important factors that determine temperature distribution in 
Ethiopia and in the Central African Republic. 
C Ethiopia, a Mountainous Tropical Country in Eastern Africa
Location of Ethiopia
What is location? Where is your region located? Describe the location of 
Ethiopia.
Location refers to the position or site that a place occupies. It is understood in 
two ways, relative location and absolute location.
Relative Location: Location of a place in relation to water bodies or land masses. 
It is also known as vicinal location. It can also be explained in terms of compass 
points such as North, East, South and West etc.
Ethiopia is located in the Horn of Africa. It shares common boundaries with five 
neighbouring countries. 
Table 2.9: Ethiopia’s borderlines, shared with neighbouring countries 
Country Location Boundary lines in (km)
Sudan West 1750
Somalia South East 1600
Eritrea North 840
Kenya South 760
Djibouti East 310
F Size of Ethiopia is 1,106,000 sq. km
F In terms of land-area size Ethiopia is 10th in Africa and 25th in the world
Absolute location is the position obtained in reference to the parallels of latitudes 
and meridians of longitude. The latitudes and longitudes are measured in degrees, 
which are expressed in numbers. Ethiopia has four extreme points. These are the 
Grade 9 Geography 104
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
southern most tip, northern most tip, western most tip and eastern most tip. Thus, 
Ethiopia’s absolute location is 3o N to 15o N and 33o
E to 48o
E.
F The north – south extent of Ethiopia is 12o
F The east – west extent of Ethiopia is 15o
Activity 2.23
Using Figure 2.56, perform the following task and answer the following question. 
1 Explain the relative location of Ethiopia.
2 What is the influence of the south–north extent of Ethiopia on its climate? 
Discuss.
The Relief of Ethiopia
What does relief mean? What are the major relief features of Ethiopia?
Relief means the differences in altitude and surface structure of any part of the 
earth.
Ethiopia
Figure 2.56 The relative and absolute locations of Ethiopia
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 105
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Ethiopia is characterized by a variety of landforms, such as mountains, plains, 
depressions, and valleys. The major landforms of Ethiopia can be classified into 
Â Highlands Â Lowlands
The point at an altitude of 1000 meters above sea level is generally considered to 
be the division between highlands and lowlands.
 
I Highlands
What is highland? What are the major highland areas of Ethiopia?
Highlands of Ethiopia are grouped into three areas: 
1 Northern highlands: include Tigray, Wollo, Gojjam, Gonder and the 
Shewan plateaus.
2 The Southwest Highlands: include parts of Wellega, Illubabor, Keffa, 
Gamogoffa and Benishangul highlands. 
3 The Southeast Highlands: They are separated from the northern and 
southwestern highlands by the Ethiopian Rift Valley. They include the 
Arsi-Bale Massif, Jemjem Plateaus and Hararghe Highlands.
The highlands of Ethiopia account for more than half of the total area of the 
country. They experience cool climate and adequate rainfall. Here altitude 
modifies the climatic condition of Ethiopia.
Figure 2.57 Major relief of Ethiopia
Grade 9 Geography 106
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
II Lowlands
What is low land? What are the major lowland areas of Ethiopia?
Lowlands of Ethiopia include the areas below 1000 meters in altitude, and they 
are mostly found in the peripheral parts of Ethiopia. They are grouped into three 
categories. These are: 
1 Western Lowlands: They include the Tekeze-Setit lowland, the AbayDinder and the Baro Akobo lowlands.
2 Southeastern Lowlands: include the Borana, Elkerre and Ogaden 
lowlands.
3 Awash-Afar Lowland: occupies the floor of the Rift Valley.
F The Awash Valley: extends from the south of Koka Dam to the mouth 
of the Awash River.
F Afar Depression: extends northwards within the floor of the Rift Valley. 
It is the lowest point of Ethiopia, and the Kobar sink (116 m below sea 
level) is part of it.
Activity 2.24
In your group, answer the following question and perform the following tasks. 
1 Can you name the basic physical features of Ethiopia?
2 Using the map in Figure 2.57, locate regions (kilil) where the lowlands of 
Ethiopia are mostly found.
II Temperate Zone
What does temperate zone mean? Where is the temperate zone located?
What are the climatic characteristics of the temperate zone?
Location
The temperate zone is located between 23½o
, and 66½o, both north and south 
of the equator. The temperate zone is the transitional zone between the tropical 
zone and the frigid zone. It is also known as a mid-latitude region.
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 107
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Climate
Temperate regions usually have four distinct seasons. They are summer, winter, 
autumn and spring. Weather changes are observed in each season. Precipitation 
ranges from 750 mm to 1500 mm. Temperature ranges from below freezing point 
during the winter, to 30o
C or more during the warmest days of summer. There 
are important factors that bring about frequent weather changes in the temperate 
zone. These are: 
F Convergence of tropical and polar air masses: This results in cyclonic 
storms and fronts.
F Angle of the sun: The sun is never overhead in the temperate zones. 
Therefore it does not heat the earth very much.
F Length of day: There is a big difference in the length of day between 
summer and winter. Days are longer in summer and shorter in winter.
F Effects of continents: This is more important in the northern hemisphere, 
where there are very large areas of land. In winter, the centres of the 
continents become very cold because they are far away from the sea. 
In this season, the angle of the sun is very oblique and it does not give 
much heat. During summer, the interiors of the continents become very 
hot. The annual range of temperature is therefore very great. 
Figure 2.58 Natural regions of the temperate zone
Mediterranean
Temperate Monsoon
Temperate Grasslands of the 
southern Hemisphere
Temperate Grasslands of the 
Northern Hemisphere
Temperate Deserts 
(Interior of continent) Coniferous Forests (Taiga)
The Cool Temperate Eastern Margin
The Cool Temperate Western Margin
Warm Cool
Grade 9 Geography 108
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Temperate region has coniferous forest, grasslands and shrublands. The region as 
a whole is generally more developed than the other regions. Most of the worlds 
industries are found in this region. Agriculture is also highly developed. Both 
growing of crops and rearing of animals are carried on modern and scientific 
basis. This is true with fishing and forestry, too.
The temperature region is, therefore, the most important producer of both 
agricultural and industrial productions in the world. 
Sub-regions: The temperate zone is a very extensive zone. It contains many 
regions with different characteristics. But the two main divisions are the warm 
temperate and the cool temperate regions.
The warm temperate region includes:
F The Mediterranean region areas.
F The temperate monsoon lands.
F The warm temperate grasslands of the southern hemisphere.
F The temperate deserts (in the interiors of the continents).
The cool temperate region includes: 
F The temperate grasslands of the northern hemisphere.
F The cool temperate western margins.
F The cool temperate eastern margins.
F The coniferous forest belts.
One sample area of each sub-region is discussed in detail below.
A Mediterranean Region
What is the location of the Mediterranean region? What are the climatic 
characteristics of the Mediterranean region? 
Location 
The Mediterranean region is located on the western coasts of the continents, 
particularly in the middle latitudes (30o
 to 45o
 north and 30o
 to 40o south of the 
equator). The major Mediterranean-region areas are:
F The surrounding area of (the shore of) Mediterranean sea
F Southwestern part of South Africa
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 109
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
F Central Chile
F Central California. 
F Southwest and Southern Australia (Adelaide to Melbourne).
F Northern New Zealand.
Climate
The climate is characterized by warm to hot, dry summers and mild to cool, wet 
winters. Summer has off shore dry winds. But winter has on shore wet westerly 
winds.
During the summer season, the Mediterranean lands are under the influence of 
sub-tropical (Horse Latitude) high pressure. This means the dry trade winds 
blow out from them and do not bring rain, but temperature is high. In winter, 
the winds that blow over these areas are the onshore westerlies. These winds 
blowing from the ocean bring rain to the Mediterranean-region areas, but the 
temperature is low.
Table 2.10: Climate data for Algers 37oN
Months J F M A M J J A S O N D
Temp. o
C 10 11 13 15 18 22 24 25 23 19 15 12
 Rainfall, in 
mm.
116 76 57 65 36 14 2 4 27 84 93 117
Figure 2.59 Location of Mediterranean-region areas
Grade 9 Geography 110
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Activity 2.25
Study Table 2.10 and answer the following questions and perform the following tasks. 
1 Which months of the year represent summer and winter?
2 List the months with the highest and lowest rainfall.
3 List the months with the highest and lowest temperatures.
Natural Vegetation
What is Natural vegetation?
Many years ago the Mediterranean region was covered with evergreen forests. 
However, in most areas the forests have been destroyed and replaced by a type 
of vegetation known as Maquis. The Maquis vegetation consists of small short 
trees with dense growth of shrubs. The olive tree is the most common. Almost 
all kinds of citrus fruits grow in the Mediterranean region.
Human Activities 
Agriculture is highly diversified and specialized in the Mediterranean region 
areas. The most important crops grown in the Mediterranean lands are grapes, 
figs, oranges, apples, vegetables, olives, wheat and, in the wetter areas, rice. 
Because of the dry hot summer, agriculture in the Mediterranean region depends 
on irrigation.
Transhumance is also practiced in the area. This is the practice among pastoral 
farmers of moving their herds and flocks between two regions of different climates. 
In mountainous regions, the animals are driven from mountain to valley pastures 
for the winter and back again to mountain pastures for the summer. 
Mining: Only a few areas have mineral deposits-such as gold and petroleum in 
California and copper in Chile. Italy is a major producer of mercury. Chrome and 
coal are mined in Turkey.
Manufacturing Industries: The existing industries process agricultural products. 
Wine making, extraction of olive oil and fruit drying are some of the industrial 
activities.
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 111
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Activity 2.26
In your group, perform the following tasks and answer the following questions. 
1 Why is irrigation important in the Mediterranean region areas?
2 The Mediterranean-region areas are scattered in different parts of the world. 
What common things do they share?
3 In most parts of the world, winter is cold and dry. But in Mediterranean region 
areas, it is rainy. Discuss why this happens.
B Coniferous Forest Region/Taiga
Where is the location of the coniferous region? What are the major areas of the 
coniferous region? What are the climatic characteristics of this region? 
Location
This region lies approximately between 55o
 North and 70o
 North latitudes. 
The coniferous forests are found only in the northern hemisphere. The major 
coniferous forest areas are:
F Northern America
F Northern Norway, Sweden and Finland
F Parts of Asia, South of the arctic circle and north of the temperate 
grassland.
Coniferous 
Forests
Figure 2.60 The Coniferous forest belt (Taiga)
Grade 9 Geography 112
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Climate
The climate changes a lot from season to season. Winter is long and very cold. 
For over half of the year, the mean monthly temperature is below zero. The winter 
days are short, but the sky is clear. In winter, the northern hemisphere is tilted 
away from the sun. As a result these lands get only short periods of daylight.
When the summer season begins, the long days of bright sunshine make the 
temperature high. In summer, the northern hemisphere is tilted toward the sun, 
so these lands get long hours of daylight. Summer is also a season of maximum 
rainfall. The rainfall is mainly cyclonic. The total annual rainfall ranges between 
300 mm and 750 mm. Even though the total rainfall is low, it is adequate for plant 
growth, as the rate of evaporation is low.
Table 2 11: Climate table of Verkhoyansk, Siberia
Months J F M A M J J A S O N D
Annual 
Max. Temp. oC
-43 -37 -20 -3 10 20 23 18 9 -9 -32 -40
Annual 
Min. Temp. oC
-49 -46 -39 -22 -3 6 9 4 -3 -19 -40 -47
Precipitation mm. 6 6 5 6 12 23 33 32 14 13 10 8
Source: Pogoda. ru. net
Activity 2.27
Using Table 2.11, answer the following questions. 
1 From the table can you tell how many months have temperatures above zero?
2 What is the mean annual temperature of Verkhoyansk?
3 What is the annual range of temperature of Verkhoyansk?
4 Plot a line and bar graphs showing both temperature and rainfall of 
Verkhoyansk?
Natural vegetation
What type of natural vegetation can grow in this region?
The vegetation in the region consists of conifer trees. The coniferous forests 
have low species diversity. Single species of trees grow together in large stands 
where there is suitable soil. The trees have adapted to the harsh climate of the 
region. They get and save moisture through their long roots, spongy wood and 
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 113
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
needle shaped-leaves. As the trees are evergreen, no moisture is lost in making 
new leaves each year.
Human Activities
What type of economic activities are practised in this region?
The climate of the coniferous forests is not favourable for growing crops because 
the growing season of this region is too short. The soils are not usually fertile. 
As a result, agriculture is not an important activity in this region. But conditions 
are excellent for forestry, which is one of the most important economic activities 
in these areas.
The coniferous trees are softwood, which can be easily cut and shaped. The trees 
are long and straight, from which long and flat pieces of timber for building can 
be made. The logs of coniferous trees are good for making pulp, from which 
paper and rayon are made. The nature of the forest makes their exploitation 
easier. This is because the same kind of trees grow in dense stands.
Lumbering (the felling of trees) is usually done during winter because of two 
reasons.
F There is little water inside the trees.
F The ground becomes hard and frozen. which makes movement easy. 
Nowadays, power machines that fell, trim, drag and load the logs are available. 
In order to get a continuous supply of timber for the woodwork industry, 
reforestation is carried out in the region. 
Figure 2.61 Coniferous forest
Grade 9 Geography 114
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
Mining: The coniferous forest region is also rich in several mineral deposits. 
Iron ore, gold, cobalt, zinc, uranium, oil, copper and lead are the main minerals 
of the region. Sweden, Canada, and the Russian Federation have rich iron ore 
deposits. Siberia is well known for its coal, oil and gas deposits.
Generally, the coniferous forest region has a well-developed industrial base. This 
is supported by the availability of many mineral deposits, rich forest resources 
and cheap and abundant water power from rivers.
Activity 2.28
In your group, perform the following tasks and answer the following questions. 
1 Describe the natural conditions that favour forestry in the coniferous forest 
region.
2 How does the vegetation withstand the harsh climate of the coniferous forest 
region?
3 What factors facilitated industrial development in the coniferous forest region?
III Frigid (Cold) Zone
Where is the location of frigid zone? Why is this region cold?
The frigid zone is located between 66½o
 to 90o
, both N and S of the equator. In 
some areas natural conditions of this zone are not limited by latitudinal location. 
For example, in Canada, this zone bends southwards to about 55o
N. The boundary 
between the cold temperate and the frigid zone is marked by 10o
C isotherm of the 
warmest month. Common vegetations of this zone are lichens, mosses, grasses, 
cushion plants, and low shrubs which spring to life during the short summer 
season. They remain dormant for about ten months of the year. However on the 
ice bound areas, such as Antarctica, there is no vegetation because the temperature 
is not above the freezing point and there is no sufficient sunlight that serves as a 
source of energy for life.
The most widespread people in the region are the Inuit (Eskimos), Indians, Lapps, 
Chukchi, Koyaki, and Yakuts. They are found in Alaska, Canada, Greenland, 
Finland, Norway, Sweden and Siberia. They follow their traditional ways of life 
as hunters, reindeer herders, fishing, fur trapping, and they are being trained for 
more settled occupations, such as Farming and mining.
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 115
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
All of the native Arctic people have developed a unique ability to survive in their 
harsh environment by skillfully using the few materials available to them. From 
snow, ice and animal skins and bones they have fashioned a simple technology 
that enables them to build shelters, weapons, and forms of transportation such 
as sleds and kayaks (small, skin-covered boats). Land and sea animals and fish 
provide their main source of food. The frigid zone has two sub-regions. These 
are tundra and the polar ice caps.
A Tundra Region
What is tundra? Where are the areas of tundra located? What are the climatic 
characteristics of the tundra sub-region?
The word tundra refers to an area where the growth of trees is prevented due to 
low temperatures and short seasons that restrict growth.
The tundra is a transitional zone between the polar ice caps and the coniferous 
forest belt. Tundra is found only in the northern hemisphere. It extends along the 
northern Arctic shores of the continental land mass. 
Climate
Tundra has two distinct seasons. These are the summer and winter seasons. During 
the summer season, there is long daily duration of sunshine, but the temperature 
is very low. Only three or four months have average temperatures above the 
freezing point. This is because the sun’s rays are very slant, and therefore lack 
heat. Winter is cold and long. During the daytime, the sky is dark, and stars can 
be seen shining. There is twilight in the middle of the day.
Cancer
Equator
Capricorn
Tundra Permanent Ice
Arctic circle Northern Siberia
Greenland
Labrador
Aklavik
Figure 2.62 Frigid zone
Grade 9 Geography 116
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
The rainfall level in the tundra is low. The amount of annual total rainfall is 
below 250 mm.
Activity 2.29
Using Figure 2.63, 
1 List the months with the highest and the lowest precipitation.
2 List the months with the highest and the lowest temperature.
Natural Vegetation
Is the type of climate experienced in the tundra suitable for plant growth? 
Why? What kind of plants grow in the tundra? 
As plants cannot grow in temperatures below 6o
C, there is little or no vegetation 
in tundra areas. In places where the snow is not thick, low forms of plants such as 
lichens, mosses and sedges grow during the summer season. On the southern margins 
of the tundra lands, and in lower areas, there are short trees and flowering plants.
Human Activities
What are the main human activities in tundra?
The tundra is a sparsely populated region. There are a few scattered tribes such as 
Eskimos (Inuit), Lapps, Finns, Aleuts and Tunguses. These are primitive peoples 
who have adapted themselves to the cold and difficult environment of the tundra. 
J F M A M J J A S O N D
0
50
150
200
250
300
350
100
35
-35
25
-25
15
-15
5
-5
Precipitation (mm)
Temperature (
oc)
Figure 2.63 The climate graph for Barrow, Alaska 
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 117
2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.3 Natural Regions Of The Earth
The people lead primitive 
ways of life and depend on 
hunting, fishing, and reindeer 
herding. In North America, 
the Eskimos settle along the 
seashores in igloos (houses 
made up of blocks of ice) in 
the cold winter. During the 
summer, the people move 
inland and live in tents which 
are made of animal skins.
Activity 2.30
In pairs, perform the following tasks.
1 Compare the adaptations of tundra vegetation to its environment with the 
adaptations of desert vegetation.
2 Describe the way of life of the tundra people and explain how they have 
adapted themselves to the conditions of the tundra region.
B Polar Ice Cap Region
What is polar ice cap? Where is the location of polar ice cap?
A polar icecap is a high latitude region of the earth that is covered with ice. The 
two polar ice caps are located near the North and South poles. These natural regions 
include Greenland and the Arctic islands and Arctic Ocean in the northern hemisphere 
and the continent of Antarctica and the South Sea in the southern hemisphere. 
Climate
Ice caps are generally characterized by negative temperatures. The average 
temperature for each month of the year is less than 0o
C. The precipitation is very 
low and falls in the form of snow. In Greenland the total annual precipitation is 
about 80 to 100 mm. The whole of Antarctica receives an average precipitation 
of less than 150 mm per year.
Natural Vegetation
Plant growth is impossible as the regions are permanently covered by ice and 
snow. The soil of the region is permanently frozen. Except few areas the surface 
Figure 2.64 Eskimos (Inuit) building a 
snow house (Igloo)
Grade 9 Geography 118
2.4 Natural Regions Of The Earth
is covered with ice. In those areas, a little vegetation, like mosses, lichens, and 
algae may grow with the help of the light of the very short summer.
Human Activities
There are no people living permanently in Antarctica. Only scientists and hunters 
visit this cold continent. At present, the only resource of Antarctica is whale oil. 
But it is believed to contain rich deposits of coal. The Arctic Ocean is rich in 
animals that can be used as sources of food and material for clothing. The Arctic 
region is also important for military strategies. For example, the USA has an air 
base at Thule in Greenland.
Activity 2.31
In your geography work group, answer the following questions. 
1 Do people live on polar ice caps? If your answer is no, why not? 
2 Explain the influence of climate on the vegetation of the polar ice caps and of 
the hot regions.
 Exercise 2.3
I Determine whether each of the following statements is true or 
false 
1 The equatorial rainforest region is the most advanced industrial region of 
the world. 
2 Climate makes the tropical zone different from the frigid zone.
3 The longitudinal extension of Ethiopia results in a tropical climate.
4 Temperature decreases from the equator towards the poles.
5 Taiga is part of the polar zone. 
II Choose the correct answer. 
6 Tropical deserts exhibit all of the following characteristics except 
A extremely dry conditions 
B dense plant growth 
C location between 20˚ and 30˚ latitude 
D influenced by the subtropical highs
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 119
2.4 Natural Regions Of The Earth 2.4 Ecosystem
7 In regions with a Mediterranean climate, almost all the yearly precipitation 
falls 
A in autumn 
B in spring
C in winter 
D in summer 
8 The most important economic activity of the coniferous forest region is 
A Plantation agriculture 
B Forestry 
C Crop cultivation 
D All are correct 
9 Identify the equatorial rainforest area that is the largest, after the Amazon 
Basin. 
A Congo Basin
B Indonesian islands
C South East Asia
D Mehagreb region 
10 The geographical criteria used to classify the whole world as in the tropical, 
temperate or frigid zone is 
A Latitude
B Altitude
C Population
D Temperature 
2.4 ECOSYSTEM
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ define the term ecosystem;
Þ identify the components of ecosystem; and
Þ demonstrate interdependence in the ecosystem.
Key Terms 
³ Abiotic
³ Biotic 
³ Carnivorous
³ Consumers 
³ Decomposers
³ Ecosystem
³ Herbivorus
³ Omnivorous
³ Producers 
What is an ecosystem? What are the components of an ecosystem?
An ecosystem is a community of living things and their non-living environment.
It is a basic functional unit of biosphere, consisting of organisms (plants and 
animals) and their environment (air, water, soil and rock). The non-living features 
of the environment are the abiotic factors, and the organisms in the environment 
Grade 9 Geography 120
2.4 Ecosystem
are the biotic factors. Populations and communities make up an ecosystem. An 
ecosystem may be small organisms in a drop of water, or even the whole earth 
as one system. There are many types of ecosystems, even within a relatively 
small area. Some are on land, others are aquatic. All components of an ecosystem 
function together as a closed unit of biological community or association. 
All ecosystems require energy in order to exist. This is provided by sunlight, 
with only minor contributions from other sources. Energy from the sun reaches 
the earth’s surface in two forms. These are heat energy and light energy. Heat 
energy cannot be used directly by plants and animals. Light energy can be 
captured only by green plants during the process of photosynthesis. Only about 
one percent of light energy falling on leaves is converted into food energy and 
stored as carbohydrate molecules.
Ecosystems have lots of different living organisms that interact with each other. 
The living organisms in an ecosystem can be divided into three categories:
producers, consumers and decomposers. They are all important parts of the 
ecosystem.
F Producers are the green plants. They make their own food by means 
of photosynthesis. Green plants are the primary passage from one 
organism to another along the food chain. A food chain is a simple way 
of showing how energy in the form of food passes from one organism 
to another. 
F Consumers are animals, which get their energy from the producers or 
from organisms that eat producers.
Suns energy enters
the ecosystem
Photosynthesis
Nutrients for decomposers
Energy Nutrients
Key
Producers (Plants) Energy passed on Consumers (animals)
Heat energy
lost Primary consumer
(herbivore)
Secondary consumer
(carnivore)
Decomposers
(insects, worms,
bacteria etc.)
Heat energy leaves
ecosystem
Figure 2.65 All plants and animals are linked with 
the natural environment. This is an ecosystem
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 121
2.4 Ecosystem 2.5 Ecosystem
There are three types of consumers:
Â Herbivores (primary consumers) are animals that eat plants.
Â Carnivores (secondary consumers) are animals that eat herbivores and 
sometimes other carnivores.
Â Omnivores are animals that eat both plants and other animals. 
F Decomposers are plants and animals that break down dead plants 
and animals into organic materials that go back into the soil. When 
organisms die, their bodies decompose and form a source of energy 
and nutrients for other organisms. Similarly, waste matter passed from 
the bodies of living organisms are also sources of energy and nutrients. 
These materials are not wasted by their ecosystems. They form the 
food for many other organisms, which are referred to as decomposers. 
Decomposers are micro organisms, mainly fungi and bacteria, which 
live on dead organic matter.
Activity 2.32
In pairs, perform the following task and discuss the following questions. 
1 Give an example of ecosystem and explain how it is self-supporting.
2 What is the difference between abiotic factors and biotic factors? Give five 
examples of each.
3 What is the food chain?
4 “Everything in the biosphere is connected.” Do you agree or disagree? Discuss 
this question.
 Exercise 2.4
I Choose the correct answer. 
1 A community and its physical environment together is 
A population
B an ecosystem
C habitat 
D niche 
2 An ecosystem is a community of plants and animals that depend upon one 
another and their surroundings for survival. 
A True B False 
Grade 9 Geography 122
2.5 Ecosystem
3 Which of the following best explains why many kinds of plants and animals 
can live together in an ecosystem?
A plants and animals all care for each other and protect one another. 
B plants and animals are all parts of a food chain and depend on each 
other to live. 
C plants and animals have nothing to do with each other, so they can 
live together. 
D plants and animals all feed on the same thing, so they compete with 
each other for food. 
4 What name is given to all organisms that feed on other organisms? 
A Carnivores
B Consumers 
C Omnivores
D Producers 
5 Deer and zebra feed on grasses and other plants. Leopards and lions feed 
on deer and zebra. Which of these is the role of the deer and zebra in this 
ecosystem? 
A Producers
B Carnivores
C Consumers
D Decomposers 
6 Which one of the following best describes the role of a producer in an 
ecosystem? 
A A producer supplies energy for the consumers in the ecosystem. 
B A producer supplies light for the consumers in the ecosystem.
C A producer supplies oxygen for the consumers in the ecosystem.
D A producer supplies water for the consumer in the ecosystem. 
7 An ecosystem includes 
A one type of organism 
B two types of organisms 
C at least one type of plant and one type of animal 
D a wide variety of organisms 
8 What kind of organisms can produce their own food? 
A Carnivores
B Animals
C Green plants
D Herbivores 
II Complete each of the following statements with the correct 
word or term. 
9 The original source of energy in an ecosystem is _______. 
10 A population and the environment in which its members interact form 
_______.
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 123
2.5 Ecosystem 2.5 Villagization Of The World Through Distance-time Decay
2.5 VILLAGIZATION OF THE WORLD 
THROUGH DISTANCE-TIME DECAY
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ identify what developments of transport and communication technology 
has brought changes in location of economic activities.
Þ discuss how development of transport and communication technology 
has brought changes in location of economic activities.
Key Terms 
³ Communication 
³ Development
³ Distance-time decay
³ Globalization / Villagization 
³ Technology
³ Transport 
Villagization and Distance-Time Decay
What is villagization? What makes the world a global village ?
Villagization in this context refers to the time-space compression which has 
resulted from the increasing, rapid movement and interaction of people from 
all parts of the world. Today, due to advancements in transportation and other 
communications technologies, the world’s population are much “closer” than 
ever before. These technological advancements have reduced the time needed 
to travel from one corner of the world to any other and to communicate over 
distances.
Distance-time decay: is a geographical term which describes the effects of 
distance and time on cultural or spatial interactions, the production of goods 
and the location of activities. The distance-time decay effect is the decline in 
interaction between two localities as the distance and time between them increases. 
With the advent of faster travel, distance and time have less effect than they 
did in the past. Advances in communications and technological devices such as 
phones, radio and television broadcasts, and the internet, have further decreased 
the effects of distance and time.
Grade 9 Geography 124
2.5 Villagization Of The World Through Distance-time Decay
The socio-economic impacts of world villagization
World villagization impacts many socio-economic and cultural features of our 
world. Although some of them operate primarily in the developed countries, their 
effects are increasingly evident in developing countries such as Ethiopia.
Â On production of goods and service delivery: In the past, time and distance 
had a profound impact on the location of markets and the production of 
goods. Perishable goods, such as vegetables, fruits, and fresh milk, used to 
be primarily produced and sold close to urban centers in order to sell and 
consume them fresh. However, today any type of perishable good can reach 
its consumers within a short period of time without perishing or losing its 
freshness. Hence, today distance and time have little or no impact on the 
production and market of perishable goods.
Fast communications such as the internet have improved the delivery of 
goods and services even without face-to-face contact. Today people can 
make a purchase or transfer money from one part of the world to another 
while sitting at home. Similarly, many people are working for companies 
located thousands of kilometers away from their homes, and do not need to 
be there physically. 
Â On location of settlements and industries: In the past, the distance-timedecay effect deeply affected the location of settlements and industries. 
They had to be located near resources and energy. Similarly, industrial 
workers needed to live near their work places. Now, advancements in 
transportation networks have allowed many industrial workers to commute 
daily from their homes to workplaces many kilometres away. In the same 
way, industrial components such as sources of energy and natural resources 
can now be transported to almost anywhere they are needed. In general, 
the time-distance-decay effect that used to profoundly affect our socioeconomic and physical environments on local, regional, and global scales 
has been mostly overcome in many parts of the world. This has produced 
what we call the villagization of the world. Another term for this process 
is globalization. It has greatly affected the social, cultural, political and 
economic landscapes of our world. 
Grade 9 Geography 125
2.5 Villagization Of The World Through Distance-time Decay 2.5 Villagization Of The World Through Distance-time Decay
 
Activity 2.33
Be in groups and give answers to the following questions. 
1 The world is considered to be a “global village.“ What do you understand by 
this?
2 Why is the world called a global village?
3 What is the contribution of modern transport and communication technologies 
to connecting distant areas of the entire world?
1500 –1840
1850 –1930
1950s
1960s to the present
Figure 2.66 Villagization of the world through distance-time decay
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 126
Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY
Þ The surface of the earth is changed by internal and external forces.
Þ Internal forces shaping the earth are folds, faults, earth quake and volcanoes.
Þ Fractures, faults, and folds are structures caused by crustal stress (tensional 
and compressional forces).
Þ Formations of block mountains, fold mountains, and rift valleys are caused 
by internal forces.
Þ Earthquakes are caused by the movement of rock along faults in the earth’s 
crust.
Þ Earthquakes originate at the focus. The epicentre is the point on the surface 
directly above the focus.
Þ The movement of magma (molten rock below the surface) into the crust or 
onto its surface is called volcanicity.
Þ The products of volcanicity are; external (volcanoes, lava plateaus, geysers 
and hot springs) and internal (sills, dikes, batholiths, and laccoliths).
Þ External forces shaping the earth are weathering and erosion.
Þ Weathering is the simple breaking down of rocks.
Þ The two types of weathering are physical and chemical weathering.
Þ Physical weathering breaks up rocks into smaller pieces. Its main agents are 
frost, temperature changes, plants and animals.
Þ Chemical weathering (decomposition) causes rock to dissolve or 
decompose. Its main agents are rainwater and actions of plants and 
animals.
Þ Erosion involves the breaking down of rock and the carrying away of rock 
particles. Erosion is caused by moving water, wind, etc.
Þ The major agents of erosion are water and wind erosion.
Þ The types of erosion by running water are sheet, rill and gully erosions.
Þ Atmosphere is composed of a variety of suspended dust particles, gases 
and condensed moisture droplets collectively known as aerosols.
Þ Nitrogen is a major part of the atmosphere.
Þ The layers of the atmosphere include the troposphere, stratosphere, 
mesosphere and thermosphere.
Þ Weather is the sum total of atmospheric condition for a short period of time.
Þ Climate is the average of weather conditions over a long period of time.
Þ The major elements of weather and climate are temperature, rainfall, winds, 
air pressure, etc.
Þ Temperature affects air pressure, winds, and humidity.
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 127
Unit Review
Þ Solar energy powers the water cycle.
Þ Heat transfer occurs by radiation, conduction and convection.
Þ The major factors that affect the distribution of temperature include latitude, 
altitude, distance from the sea, cloud cover, ocean currents, pressure and 
winds.
Þ Temperature is measured with a thermometer.
Þ Clouds are made up of water droplets.
Þ The three types of rainfall are convectional, cyclonic and orographic (relief) 
rainfall.
Þ Rainfall is measured with a rain gauge
Þ Air has weight and exerts pressure on the earth’s surface.
Þ Air pressure is measured by a barometer.
Þ Air pressure depends mainly on temperature.
F High temperature makes air expand so that it has a lower density, 
creating an area of low pressure.
F Low temperature makes air contract so that it has a higher density. This 
makes an area of high pressure.
Þ Winds blow outward from the centre of high pressure areas and blow toward 
the center of low pressure areas.
Þ Deflection of winds is caused by the rotation of the earth.
Þ The speed of wind affects the amount of deflection
Þ The force which affects the direction of movements of winds is called the 
coriolis force.
Þ The three types of surface winds are planetary, monsoon and local winds.
Þ A region as a whole is understood to be a part of the earth’s surface which 
has similar physical elements and, to some extent, similar human activities.
Þ The earth is divided into three major natural regions (tropical, temperate 
and frigid zones).
Þ Ethiopia is a tropical country with a multifaceted environment.
Þ All living things in an ecosystem have close links in the transfer of energy 
which is called the food chain.
Þ Through the process of the food chain, food energy is passed from one to 
another member of an ecosystem.
Þ Globalization/vilagization is a broad term that is used for an emerging global 
society in which economic, political, cultural and environmental events 
taking place in one part of the world quickly come to have significance for 
people of other parts of the world.
Þ Globalization is the result of communication and information technologies, it 
establishes links between individuals communities and governments, various 
international institutions and multinational companies play an important role 
in globalization.
Þ People may continue to live in a single nation but culturally or psychologically 
they are engaged with the lives of people of other countries.
Grade 9 Geography 128
Unit Review
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 2
I Determine whether each of the following sentences is true or 
false.
1 Water is the most active erosion agent in a desert region.
2 The force that causes the stretching of rocks is tension.
3 The focus of an earthquake is the point on the surface directly above the 
epicentre.
4 All of the sun’s energy that reaches the atmosphere is absorbed by the 
earth’s surface.
5 The upper boundary of our weather is known as the tropopause.
II Match items in column ‘B’ with items in column ‘A’ .
A B
6 Anticyclone 
7 Lapse rate 
8 Sublimation 
9 Temperature 
10 Cyclone 
III Choose the correct word or phrase from the given alternatives. 
11 Which of the following is not associated with earthquakes?
A body waves
B focus
C geyser
D seismograph 
12 Which one of the following is not fold mountain? 
A Andes 
B Himalaya
C Ras Dashen
D Alps 
13 Which one of these does not belong to volcanic activity? 
A caldera
B hot springs
C waterfall
D crater
A Element of weather and climate.
B Changing of solid into gas and vice versa.
C Low-pressure area.
D Change of temperature per unit of altitude.
E High-pressure area.
F Summer solstice for the northern hemisphere.
Unit 2: Physical Environment of the world and Ethiopia 129
Unit Review
14 Which one is a common feature in the upper course of a river? 
A flood plain
B meander
C ox-bow lake 
D ‘V’-shape valley 
15 A limestone column that hangs down from the ceiling of an underground 
cave is _________ .
A artesian 
B stalagmite 
C stalactite
D barchans 
16 Which of the following is not an internal force? 
A earthquake
B erosion
C volcanic eruption
D folding 
17 Which one is not associated with wind action?
A barchans
B sand dune
C lagoon
D loess deposit 
18 Batholiths are:
A dissected mountains
B igneous rock structures 
C plateaus
D fold mountains
19 Anticlines and synclines are the product of 
A tension
B compression
C shearing
D A and B
20 Meanders are associated with 
A waterfalls
B flood plains
C drainage basins
D V-shape valleys
21 The apparent force that causes moving bodies to be deflected westward is the 
A prevailing westerlies
B convection current 
C coriolis effect
D earths’ gravity 
22 The coldest layer of the atmosphere is 
A thermosphere
B troposphere
C mesosphere
D stratosphere
23 The zone that receives the most radiant energy from the sun is 
A snow cover 
B cloud covers
C clear sky 
D vegetation cover 
Grade 9 Geography 130
Unit Review
24 Identify which pairing is incorrect. 
A Desert-xerophytes
B Maquis-Mediterranean Vegetation
C Tundra-Eskimos 
D Savannah-coniferous
25 Deserts have cold nights because of 
A snow cover 
B cloud cover 
C clear sky 
D vegetation cover
26 Which of the following is a biotic factor?
A animals 
B air 
C soil 
D sunlight
IV Complete each of the following sentences with the correct word 
or phrase. 
27 The average weather condition recorded for a long period of time is 
_________.
28 _________ forces push rocks together, _________ forces pull rocks apart. 
29 The type of rainfall in a equatorial rainforest region is mainly _________
type. 
30 The process of mountain building is known as _________ . 
31 The break up and decomposition of rocks in a place is _________. 
32 Wearing away of the land is called _________ .
