In the previous unit, you have learned about the physical environment of the 
world and Ethiopia. In this unit you are going to deal with human population, 
economic activities and natural resources.
Through out human history, people have changed and adapted to the earth. They 
have done so in order to survive. Humans have been very successful. Today there 
are several billion people living on the earth. The study of human population 
has long been of interest to geographers. The pressure of population growth in 
today’s world adds great urgency to the study of population for everyone.
There are many questions which can be asked about human population. Among 
these might be: 
How many people actually live on the earth? 
How many have lived on the earth at some time in the past? 
Why do they live in some places but not in others? 
What do they do for living?
Humans desire to live and enjoy life. Food, shelter and clothing are needed for 
preservation of life, goods for luxury and comfort for enjoyment. To provide 
themselves with the necessities of life, people are engaged in various occupations. 
These occupations are called economic activities. In the world, there are numerous 
activities through which human beings earn their living. In order to live, a person 
must produce his/her basic necessities. For this, human beings employ elements 
of the natural environment, i.e., natural resources.
3.1 CONCEPT AND FACTS ABOUT HUMAN 
POPULATION
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ define the concept of human population;
Þ discuss facts about human population; 
Þ distinguish sources of population data;
Þ identify the densely and sparsely populated areas of the world; and
Þ discuss the settlement patterns of world population.
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 133
3.1 Concept And Facts About Human Population 3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
Key Terms
³ Population
³ Population data
³ Settlement
³ Rural settlement
³ Urban settlement
³ Farmstead
³ Census
³ Town
³ Metropolis
³ Demography
³ Hamlet
³ City
³ Village
³ Megalopolis
³ Conurbation
Start-up Activity
1 What is population? What makes the human population different from other 
populations?
2 Do you think that studying human population is useful and necessary? Why?
3 How do we acquire information or data about human population? What do you 
think makes each source different? Discuss with your friends. 
The term population, in population studies, refers to the total number of human 
inhabitants of a specified area, such as a city, country, or continent, at a given 
time. The human population has been a matter of study for various academic 
disciplines such as geography, biology, sociology, medical science, history, etc. 
Population geography is concerned mainly with the spatial analysis of the human 
population. It focuses on population-space relationships. Population geography 
emphasizes the spatial aspects of human population and the interaction and 
interdependence between the human population and the physical environment. 
The human population is given great emphasis and is studied by various 
disciplines including population geography. The human population is studied for 
many reasons including the following. 
F It is very dynamic as it demonstrates significant quantitative and 
qualitative changes over time and space. Such changes have a 
tremendous impact on the socio-economic development of societies.
F Change in the size, composition, structure and the location of human 
populations can have policy implications. 
F Knowing about the characteristics of the human population is important 
in order to adjust situations to existing realities. 
Grade 9 Geography 134
3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
Focus
Population studies yield knowledge that is important for planning, 
particularly by governments, in fields such as health, education, housing, 
social security, employment, and environment preservation. Such studies 
also provide information needed to formulate government population 
policies, which seek to modify demographic trends in order to achieve 
economic and social objectives.
Human population is the number of people living in a definite area. The study 
of human population is also necessary for development and socio-economic 
activities. For example, population is the major source of the labour force for 
the productive and non-productive economic sectors, such as agriculture, 
manufacturing, teaching, health services, etc. Human population is also the 
main productive force and creator of material wealth. This makes the study of 
population extremely important for the overall socio-economic development of 
a country. 
Activity 3.1
In a small group, discuss the following questions.
1 What is population?
2 Why is studying human population important?
3 For what purposes, do you think, governments use population information/data?
The world’s population has been experiencing continuous growth since the 15th
century. The rapid increase in the size of the human population is attributed to 
many factors that include: 
F advancements in scientific knowledge, agriculture, industry, medicine, 
and social organization; 
F humans; ability to control famine and disease, which have been major 
killers of humans; 
F the relatively lower cost of importing vaccines, antibiotics, insecticides, 
and high-yielding varieties of seeds; 
F improvement in peoples living conditions, which have resulted in the 
decline of deaths from infectious and parasitic diseases; 
F increase in life expectancy in most developing countries from about 
35-40 years in 1950 to 66 years by 2000. 
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 135
3.1 Concept And Facts About Human Population 3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
As a result of these and many other factors, the human population has increased 
rapidly since the 15th and 16th centuries. As some sources indicate, by 1750 there 
were only about 791 million people in the world. However, in a matter of 250 
years, the world’s population reached over 6 billion. The growth of the human 
population between 1750 and 2000 has been very rapid. The trend of growth 
during that period is shown as follows: 
Table 3.1: Trends in world population growth (1750-2050)
Region
Population Size (Millions)
 1750 1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 2050
Africa 106 107 111 133 228 797 1,846
Asia 502 635 809 947 1,437 3,689 5,369
Europe 163 203 276 408 546 727 642
Latin America and 
the Caribbean 16 24 38 74 166 523 480
North America 2 7 26 82 221 481 722
Oceania 2 2 2 6 12 30 45
Total 791 978 1,262 1,650 2,556 6,073 9,104
Source: Microsoft Encarta (2009)
The rapid increase in human population over the course of the 20th century 
has raised concerns. The earth is experiencing over population. The scientific 
consensus is that the current rate of population expansion and the accompanying 
increase in usage of resources are linked to threats to the ecosystem, such as 
rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide, global warming, and pollution. 
Thus, population growth has a direct effect on socio-economic development and 
on the quality of the environment of a given society.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
17 50 18 00 18 50 19 00 19 50 20 00 20 50
Population in Million
Year
Figure 3.1 Trends in world population growth
Grade 9 Geography 136
3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
The distribution of human population shows great variation. Africa and other 
developing regions account for the largest share of the world’s population. 
As world population rose from 2.5 billion in 1950 to 6.7 billion in 2008, the 
proportion of people living in the developing countries of Africa, Asia and Latin 
America has expanded from 68 percent to more than 80 percent. India and China 
alone make up about 37 percent of the world’s total. The share of the developed 
countries is projected to drop from about 18 percent in 2008 to less than 14 
percent in 2050. 
Table 3.2: World population size and percentage, by continent (2009)
Region Population Size 
(million)
Percent share 
(%)
World 6,810 100
Asia 4,117 60.5
Africa 999 14.7
Europe 738 10.8
Latin America and 
the Caribbean 580 8.5
N. America 341 5.0
Oceania 36 0.5
Source: Population Reference Bureau (2009)
As you can observe from the figure above, Asia accounts for over 60 percent of 
the world population, with almost 4.1 billion people. Africa follows with 999 
million people, accounting for about 14.7 percent of the world’s total. Europe’s 
738 million people make up 10.8 percent of the world’s population. Likewise, 
the populations of Latin America and the Caribbean, North America and Oceania 
account for about 8.5 percent, 5 percent and 0.5 percent of the world’s population, 
respectively.
Figure 3.2 World population size and percentage share by continents
60.5
14.7
10.8
8.5
5
0.5
Asia
Africa
Europe
Latin America and the
Caribbean
N. America
Oceania
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 137
3.1 Concept And Facts About Human Population 3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
Country wise, while some countries have smaller population sizes, others are 
home to a much larger number of people. Of the world’s countries, the ten most 
populous ones are shown in the following table with their respective population 
sizes. 
Table 3.3: The world’s ten largest countries, in terms of population (2009)
Country Population (million) Percentage share
China 1,331 19.54%
India 1,171 17.20%
USA 307 4.51%
Indonesia 243 3.57%
Brazil 191 2.80%
Pakistan 181 2.66%
Bangladesh 162 2.38%
Nigeria 153 2.25%
Russia 142 2.09%
Japan 128 1.88%
Total 4,009 58.88%
Source: Population Reference Bureau (2009)
Activity 3.2
1 By referring to Figure 3.2, attempt the following questions:
i Which continent holds over 50 percent of the world’s population?
ii Which three continents have the smallest percentages of the world’s 
total population?
2 By referring to Table 3.3, attempt the following tasks.
i List the three most populous countries in rank order, according to their 
population size.
ii Categorize the ten most populous countries with respect to their 
continents.
3 Draw a pie chart to illustrate the data in Table 3.3.
A Sources of Population Data
What is population data? What are the techniques of population data collection? 
How do these techniques/methods differ from each other? Which one, do you 
think, is most reliable? Why? 
Grade 9 Geography 138
3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
Now you know what human population is and you have considered facts about 
world population. Next you will learn about the sources of population data.
Population data refers to population information, such as number, age, marital 
status, births and deaths, occupation, religion, educational status, and other 
characteristics of the human population. Such information is vital for studying 
the different aspects of the human population. That is why we say that studying 
human population is dependent on reliable population data. Statistical information 
about human population is obtained through a variety of ways.
Focus
Population information is important for many reasons. The data acquired 
through various methods is used for many purposes that include the 
following.
F It provides statistical information for making decisions related to 
social and economic affairs.
F It indicates future requirements of the population in terms of social, 
health, education, employment and other socio-economic needs. 
F It helps policy makers to forecast the needs of the population and to 
understand how to meet them. 
The following are among the most commonly used methods of gathering 
information about human populations.
i Population census
ii Sample survey
iii Vital registration 
I Population Census
What is a population census? When was the third Ethiopian population and 
housing census conducted?
Censuses are the main source of population data in many countries including 
Ethiopia. The history of census goes back to ancient times in places such as 
Rome, Greece, Palestine, India, etc. Census is usually defined as “The total 
process of collecting, analyzing, compiling and publishing demographic, 
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 139
3.1 Concept And Facts About Human Population 3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
economic and social data of all persons in a country or delineated territory at 
a specified time.” In other words, it is the official counting of all the people of 
a certain geographical area with a well defined boundary so as to collect socioeconomic and demographic information about the population.
Census provides a wealth of demographic and socio-economic data. The size, 
growth rate, fertility and mortality characteristics, marital status, employment 
situations, religion, ethnicity, income, educational status, housing conditions, sex 
and age structures and much more information about the population of a given 
area can be obtained through census. 
Focus
In Ethiopia, the census is one of the most important ways of collecting 
population data. So far, three censuses have been taken. The first was in 
1984, the second in 1994 and the last one in 2007. Census in Ethiopia is 
conducted every ten years. 
Activity 3.3
Find data for the following:
a The total number of students in your school, by grade, age and sex. Illustrate 
the data on a bar graph.
b Total population of your region by age and sex. Try to examine what impact the 
current population will have in the future.
The Main Features of Census
The following are the main features that distinguish census from the rest of the 
sources of population data. 
F Government Sponsorship: It is the responsibility of the national 
government to provide or seek the resources necessary to conduct 
census. Obtaining them requires adequate legislative support or legal 
authority.
Grade 9 Geography 140
3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
F Defined territory: census refers to specified geographical unit such as 
state, country, or province. The unit needs to have its own demarcation 
or boundaries.
F Universality: Enumeration must include every person within the scope 
of the territory without omission or duplication. Census of population 
usually try to count every one in the country as of a fixed day, often 
known as Census Day.
F Simultaneity: The census should have a specific well-defined time, 
and it should be conducted simultaneously throughout the country.
F Individual Units: in censuses, data is collected on an individual basis. 
The information that is obtained normally relates to individuals rather 
than groups. It is compiled and published. 
F Periodicity: Ideally, census should be taken at certain specified time 
interval, usually every ten or five years. For example, in the United 
States and Ethiopia, census is conducted every ten years, while Canada 
and the UK conduct census every five years.
F Expensiveness: Census is the most expensive method of data gathering. 
This is because of its universality which necessitates complete coverage 
of the entire territory and population of the place where the census is 
taken. 
Activity 3.4
In your group, discuss the following questions.
1 What are the advantages of studying population?
2 Regarding the significance of collecting population data: Do you think they can 
affect your life? If yes, how? 
3 Do people in your locality co-operate with census enumerators in giving 
dependable information? If no, why?
II Sample Surveys
What is sample survey? Is there any difference between population census and 
sample survey? Do you know of a survey that has been conducted in Ethiopia?
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 141
3.1 Concept And Facts About Human Population 3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
A sample survey is the second most important and widely used source of 
population data. It collects information only from a part of the whole population. 
They are usually undertaken to generate socio-economic and demographic data 
in greater detail than conventional censuses can provide.
Surveys are usually undertaken during a period of transition between two 
consecutive censuses. They are employed to arrive at estimates of demographic 
characteristics (age, sex, marital status, etc), population size, population 
distribution, mortality, fertility and migration. Sample surveys are also an 
important source of population statistics in areas where census is not conducted. 
In addition, they are important for gathering data to fill population information 
gaps. As there are many countries that do not conduct census regularly, the main 
source of information about world population comes from the United Nations 
Organization through sample surveys. 
Focus
As compared to census, sample survey is:
F Less expensive because it does not involve the entire population;
F Capable of providing very detailed information about the population;
F If the sample takers are well-trained and strict supervision is in 
place, it can provide data of a better quality than census; and
F Able to estimate margins of error, or the accuracy of the data.
Activity 3.5
Discuss the following questions in your group.
1 Compare and contrast census and sample surveys.
2 Which one provides detailed information for a specific section/sample of the 
whole population?
III Vital Registration 
What is vital registration?
Vital registration is another source of population data. It refers to the continuous 
registration of such vital events as births, deaths, marriages and divorces. These 
events are recorded as they occur. Data on vital events are gathered from birth 
Grade 9 Geography 142
3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
and death certificates, marriage licenses, divorce records and other official 
registers. The building up of a reliable vital registration system is an expensive 
and extensive process.
The completeness of registration and the reliability of the data gathered through 
vital registration can be affected by several factors including the following:
F Level of literacy and awareness of the importance of population data in 
the population;
F Social custom may lead to non-registration as a result of superstitions 
or taboos; 
F The rural population may be widely dispersed or inaccessible.
Factors Affecting the Quality of Data
What are the factors that affect the quality of data?
As we have seen so far, population data can be acquired through different methods. 
Though a variety of information can be obtained by using such systems, the 
gathered information may not necessarily be accurate. This is because there are 
a number of socio-economic and culture related problems that affect the quality 
of the data. 
Some of these problems include:
i Inadequate financing.
ii The use of different methods of census enumeration by different countries.
iii Inadequate awareness about the importance of population data among the 
general population.
iv Double entry (counting of a person twice).
v Neglecting or ignoring certain groups of people.
vi False information about the age and the occupation of people.
vii Lack of equal acceptance of the importance of vital registration by all 
countries.
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 143
3.1 Concept And Facts About Human Population 3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
Activity 3.6
Discuss how the following factors affect the quality of population data.
a Inadequate financing
b Lack of awareness about the uses of population information
c Provision of false information by the people being counted
B Distribution and settlement patterns
Do you think that human population is evenly distributed throughout the 
world? Why? What are the factors that influence the spatial distribution of 
people in the world? What does the population concentration of your locality 
look like? What factors, do you think, result in such distribution of people in 
your locality? 
Population distribution is the way that population is spread out over a given area. 
That area can be anything from a small region to the earth as a whole. For several 
reasons, human population is spread very unevenly over the earth’s surface. 
This distribution of population forms a pattern. While some areas are heavily 
populated, others are sparsely populated. 
One dot represents 100,000 People
World Population
Figure 3.3 Dot map of the world’s population distribution (Source: Media.maps.com)
Grade 9 Geography 144
3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
Activity 3.7
Look at the map in Figure 3.3 and attempt the following questions. 
1 Which areas of the world are the most densely populated? Where are the most 
sparsely populated areas?
2 When did the world’s population begin to increase dramatically?
3 Why do the most densely populated areas have high population concentrations? 
What about the cases for the presence of lesser number of people in the sparsely 
populated regions? 
The availability of natural resources, the nature of topography, the productivity of 
the soil, and many other factors have resulted in an uneven distribution of people. 
There are densely, moderately and sparsely populated areas in the world. The 
densely and sparsely populated regions of the world are outlined below. 
Densely Populated Regions
There are three main belts of high population density and concentration in the 
world. These areas are also called “Population Clusters’’ or ‘’Population Nodes’’. 
The three belts alone account for well over two-thirds of the total world’s 
population. These regions are:
1 Asiatic population belt
2 Peninsular Europe
3 Northeastern North America
1 Asiatic Population Belt: this belt is confined to the river basins of 
Monsoon Asia. The region accounts for about 60 percent of the world’s 
total population. The belt includes:
a East Asia - Japan and China are the most populous in the sub-region.
b South Asia - India, Pakistan and Bangladesh are densely populated.
2 Peninsular Europe: Europe makes up 10.8 percent of the world’s 
total population. It is the most developed cluster, in both economic and 
demographic terms globally. 
3 Northeastern North America: this part of North America (mainly the 
USA) is highly urbanized and industrialized. It accounts for about 5 percent 
of the world’s total population.
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 145
3.1 Concept And Facts About Human Population 3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
Sparsely Populated Regions
In contrast to the above discussed population clusters, there are areas of thin 
population cover. These areas include:
1 Tundra:- These areas support only a very few nomadic peoples. 
2 Hot-dry lands:- Include many of the tropical desert lands. Shortage of 
water and high temperature do not encourage permanent settlement. 
However, in desert areas where water is available, such as oasis and river 
basins, and mining sites, there are settlements located right in the heart of 
hot deserts. Example: the Sahara Desert.
3 Hot-wet lands:- Because of the unfavourable climate, there are few people 
living in these areas.
4 High relief:- Includes regions of mountainous areas with high altitude, 
rugged topography and cold temperature. These areas do not encourage 
large settlements because the terrain makes movement and interaction 
difficult.
5 Areas with poor soil:- Include very large areas of the world which are 
covered by infertile soil. Such areas do not support agricultural practices 
and hence are sparsely populated. 
Settlement Pattern
Define the term ‘settlement’? What is the difference between a rural settlement 
and an urban settlement? What are the advantages of living in an urban area? 
Do you think that living in rural areas is disadvantageous? Why?
A settlement is defined as a place in which people live, carrying out a variety of 
activities, to make their livings, such as trade, agriculture and manufacturing. 
There are varieties of settlements, and they are changing rapidly over time. These 
include hamlets, villages, towns, cities, metropolises, megalopolises, etc. These 
range, in size and function, from the simple isolated one-family farmstead and 
tiny rural hamlet to the great metropolises like New York or London. In all cases, 
however, ‘settlement’ designates an organized colony of human beings, together 
with their residences, buildings (stores, factories, warehouses etc.) and the paths 
and streets. 
Studies of settlements are concerned with the facilities humans construct in the 
process of living in an area and using its resources. Naturally, settlements are 
Grade 9 Geography 146
3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
situated as strategically as possible with respect to natural features, such as water, 
fuel, food, and protection, as well to access to transportation and communications.
Settlements may broadly be divided into rural and urban, based on the density 
of human-made structures, population concentration and dominant economic 
activity.
What do you think are the differences between rural and urban settlements? 
Where would you prefer to live? Is it in an urban or a rural area? Why?
Rural settlement: is the name given to all villages and dispersed (scattered) 
settlements in areas far from urban centres. Such settlements are widely dispersed 
and are dominated by isolated homesteads. The inhabitants of rural settlements 
are mainly engaged in agriculture. 
Urban settlement: refers to town or city settlements. People in urban areas 
depend on non-agricultural activities. In most cases, it is difficult to give an exact 
definition for urban centres. Some of the criteria used to identify urban centres 
include the official status of urban settlement, size of population, and occupation 
of the population. 
 
Megalopolis
Conurbation
Metropolice
Town
Hamlet
Isolated home/farmstead
Village
City
Urban Settlement
Rural Settlement
Figure 3.4 Hierarchies of settlement
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 147
3.1 Concept And Facts About Human Population 3.1 Concept And Fac ts About Human Population
 Exercise 3.1
I Determine whether each of the following sentences is true or 
false.
1 Censuses are the only source of population data.
2 Nigeria is the eighth most populous country in the world.
3 The tundra is one of the sparsely populated regions of the world.
4 In Ethiopia, the first housing and population census was conducted in 1994.
5 A person in a rural area depends on non-agricultural activity.
II Match items in column ‘B’ with items in column ‘A’ .
A B
6 Sample survey 
7 Vital registration system 
8 Peninsular Europe 
9 Urban settlement 
10 Rural settlement 
 
 
III Choose the correct answer.
11 One of the following is a branch of human geography that deals with the 
number, composition and distribution of human population in relation to 
the environment
A Climatology
B Population geography
C Morphology
D Map reading
12 Which of the following countries in the world has the largest population?
A India
B China 
C Pakistan
D Nigeria
13 The largest proportion of the world’s population lives in
A Africa
B Europe
C North America
D Asia
A Villages and hamlets
B Is a population data source that 
collects information from a 
fraction of the population
C Densely populated region
D Sparsely populated region
E City and town
F It is the continuous registration 
of births, deaths, marriages and 
divorces 
Grade 9 Geography 148
3.1 Economic Activities
14 One of the following is the main feature of a census.
A Universality 
B Periodicity
C Individual unit
D All are correct
15 People living in rural settlements are mainly engaged in
A Industry
B Trade
C Mining
D Agriculture
3.2 ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ list the five types of economic activities;
Þ explain the major characteristics of economic activities;
Þ examine how economic activities modify and transform resources;
Þ describe concept and meaning of land use;
Þ identify land use system in Ethiopia;
Þ differentiate driving forces that change land use systems; 
Þ differentiate rural land use from that of urban land use.
Key Terms 
³ tourism
³ industry 
³ fishing 
³ white-collar 
³ harvest 
³ forestry 
What is economic activity? What influences economic activity? 
Economic activity is the production, distribution and exchange of goods and 
services. Some examples of these activities are hunting, fishing, farming, grazing, 
mining, manufacturing, transportation, trade and others. 
In the world, there are numerous activities through which human beings earn 
their livings. In order to live, a person must provide for his/her basic necessities 
such as food, clothing and shelter. For this, people use elements of the natural 
environment, i.e., natural resources. 
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 149
3.1 Economic Activities 3.2 Economic Activities
3.2.1 Classification of Economic Activities
What are the major classes of economic activities? Can we classify economic 
activities? If yes, how? 
The economic activities practiced in the world are grouped into five, namely 
primary, secondary, tertiary, quaternary and quinary. Each type of economic 
activity is important to a society. The distribution of jobs in a particular economic 
activity in a country may indicate the level of development of the country. 
Activity 3.8
By referring to Figure 3.5, try to answer the following questions.
1 What are the major activities that are categorized under:
a Primary economic activities
b Secondary economic activities
c Tertiary economic activities
d Quaternary economic activities
e Quinary economic activities
2 What, do you think, are the differences among them?
4 Quaternary Activities
 Information
 Research
 Management
Categories of Economic Activity
3. “Service-sector” industries
5. High-level decision making
4. “White-collar” information services
 Management
5
5 Quinary Activities
 Executive Decision 
Makers
3
a e s
3 Tertiary Activities
 Retail and Wholesale Trade
 Communication
 Personal and Professional 
Services
1. Harvest or extraction
2. “Value added” industries
 Communica
2
2 Secondary Activities
 Manufacturing
 Construction
 Power Production
1
1 Primary Activities
 Agricultural product
 Gathering Industries
 Extractive Industries
Figure 3.5 Categories of economic activity
Grade 9 Geography 150
3.2 Economic Activities
A Primary Economic Activities 
What are the major primary economic activities practiced in your locality? 
What are the main purposes of producing primary goods in your area? 
Primary economic activities focus directly on the extraction of resources from 
the environment. They involve the production of food stuffs and raw materials. 
These economic activities occur at the beginning of the production cycle, where 
people live in close contact with the resources of the earth. A few examples of 
primary economic activities include agriculture, fishing, forestry, and mining. All 
of these jobs are dependent upon the natural resources of the earth.
Focus
Primary economic activities are characterized by the following. They are:
F dependent on the natural environment;
F related to the production of foodstuffs and raw materials through 
the exploitation of the resources of the earth;
F influenced by the condition of the physical environment in one way 
or another.
Primary Activities
The main types of primary activities include:
Agriculture
Forestry
Fishing
Mining
Figure 3.6 Primary economic activities
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 151
3.2 Economic Activities 3.2 Economic Activities
The dominant primary economic activities of the world that support the lives of 
millions of people are discussed below.
Agriculture 
What is agriculture? Why is agriculture an important primary economic 
activity? 
Agriculture is the science and art of cultivation of the soil and the rearing of 
livestock for either local consumption or commercial purposes. It is one of the 
most important activities of human beings, because it provides them with the 
most basic necessity; food. Agriculture, as a primary economic activity, aims at 
solving the basic problems of any society. It provides foodstuffs for the population 
and raw materials for industries. Above all, it forms the basic livelihood for the 
majority of the peoples of the world. For example, in Ethiopia about 85 percent 
of the population is engaged in agricultural activities. 
In agricultural activity, land is one of the basic means for production. The 
characteristic feature of land as a means of production is that when properly used 
its productivity increases. Another peculiarity of agriculture is that plants and 
animals are simultaneously means and objects of labor. Moreover agricultural 
production is seasonal in character, because of the fact that crops ripen at varying 
stages and times of the year.
 
Figure 3.7 Agricultural activities
Grade 9 Geography 152
3.2 Economic Activities
Forestry 
What is forestry? 
A forest is a mass of plants or a wooded area in which trees are the most common 
features. The extraction of forest products for different purposes by people is 
called forestry. Forestry is important for the production of wood, timber, gums, 
nuts, barks, etc. 
Today forest products are being used for various domestic and industrial purposes. 
The following are the most important ones. Forest products are being used:
F for construction purposes; 
F as a source of industrial raw materials;
F as a source of foodstuffs such as roots, leaves, fruits, barks, gums, 
stems, flowers, etc.
Also, indirectly forests are important because they check rapid runoff and 
consequently control soil erosion. In addition, moisture from forest vegetation 
has a moderating effect on the climate of the local environment. They also 
regulate the concentration of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, thereby 
regulating the temperature condition of the local environment. A forest is also a 
habitat for wild animals, and the preservation of a forest ensures the preservation 
of wild animals.
Activity 3.9
Discuss the following questions in your group. 
1 Are there forest resources in your locality? If yes, list the major types of tree 
species there. 
2 What are the major forest products obtained from forests in your locality? 
3 List the major wild animals living inside the forests in your locality. 
Fishery
What is fishing? 
Fishing is a primary economic activity concerned with the catching and harvesting 
of fish, other marine creatures, such as whales, seals, pearls, lobsters, crabs, 
prawns, molluscs, sponges and seaweed. 
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 153
3.2 Economic Activities 3.2 Economic Activities
Fishing is one of the oldest occupations of humankind. At present a number of 
people in some nations depend on fishing as the mainstay of their livelihoods, for 
example, Norway, Iceland and Japan. But compared to other primary economic 
activities, fishing is not a very basic economic activity. 
Activity 3.10
1 Do people in your area catch fish? Where and how? If not, why?
2 How often do you eat fish? If you do not, give reasons.
3 Do people in your area consider fish as a source of food? If not, why?
Currently fishing as an activity provides employment opportunities for only a 
very small percentage of people. Marine life provides a very minor source of 
food and non-food products. 
Ethiopia has a number of lakes, reservoirs and rivers rich in fish resources. 
However, fishing as an activity is at a low level of development. 
Mining 
What is mining?
Mining is a primary economic activity concerned with the extraction of mineralbearing substances from the earth’s crust. It is closely linked to manufacturing, 
which is a secondary type of activity. 
The earth’s crust is composed of rock containing minerals. A mineral is an 
inorganic chemical element or compound found naturally in the crust of the earth. 
Figure 3.8 Fishing
Grade 9 Geography 154
3.2 Economic Activities
Even though, most minerals are inorganic; there are also some organic minerals, 
such as coal, petroleum and natural gas. Minerals are not evenly distributed on 
the earth’s surface. 
The different types of minerals that people use for construction, jewelry making, 
and in industry come from the mining sector.
B Secondary Economic activities 
What is manufacturing? Is there any difference between manufacturing and 
industry? 
Secondary economic activities include manufacturing, construction and power 
production. Manufacturing activities take place in factories. It is the activity of 
making articles. Manufacturing is the activity which turns raw materials into 
products by using labor, energy and equipment, while industry refers to the place 
where manufacturing takes place. Also, sometimes the word industry is used to 
many types of economic activities, for example, the hotel industry, the tourist 
industry, etc. Therefore, to distinguish the activity of processing raw materials 
from the other economic activities, we specifically use the term manufacturing. 
Manufacturing uses machines, tools and labor to make things for use or sale. The 
term may refer to a range of human activities, from handicraft to the use of high 
technology. However, it is most commonly applied to the creation of industrial 
products in which raw materials are transformed into finished goods on a large 
scale. 
Manufacturing activities are characterized by the following features: 
i Dependency on raw materials that are obtained from the primary 
economic sector;
ii Transformation of raw materials into finished and/or semi-finished 
goods;
iii Most modern manufacturing industries need power, skilled manpower, 
huge capital and modern technology;
iv Most modern manufacturing industries are characterized by a high 
level of division of labor;
v The production of end products that are ready for consumption or 
semi-finished goods that serve as an input for other industries.
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 155
3.2 Economic Activities 3.2 Economic Activities
 
Activity 3.11
1 Categorize the following economic activities as primary or secondary: agriculture, 
manufacturing, fishery, forestry, mining, steel industry, cement industry 
2 As arranged by your teacher, a visit, in groups, a manufacturing industry in your locality 
and gather information on: 
i ownership; 
ii total capital invested; 
iii types of raw materials and products;
iv number of people employed; 
v power source; and
vi problems of production and distribution, if any. 
3 prepare a report for class discussion.
C Tertiary Economic Activities 
What is a tertiary economic activity?
The tertiary sector of the economy, (the service sector or the service industry) is 
the next type of economic activity. The basic characteristic of this sector is the 
provision of services. 
Secondary Activities
The main types of Secondary activities include:
Manufacturing
Construction
13
Power Production
Figure 3.9 Secondary economic activities 
Grade 9 Geography 156
3.2 Economic Activities
The tertiary sector involves the provision of services to other businesses as well as 
to the final consumers. Examples of tertiary economic activities include education, 
legal services, medical services, trade, transportation services, tourism, etc. 
Activity 3.12
In pairs, discuss the following questions: 
1 How are tertiary economic activities different from primary and secondary 
economic activities? 
2 What are the contributions of tertiary economic activities? 
Trade
What is trade? Can you explain the significance of trade in a society? How 
many forms of trade exist? 
Trade is a tertiary economic activity. It is the process of buying, selling, or 
exchanging of commodities. The earliest form of trade was bartering, which is 
the exchange of one article for another of equal value. 
The emergence of trade is related to the unequal distribution of resources that are 
essential to satisfying human needs. It also resulted from specialization of skills, 
such as weaving, metalwork, tannery, pottery, etc. Due to the variety of their 
Tertiary Activities
The main types of Tertiary activities include:
Trade
Tourism
Transportation
Communication
16
Figure 3.10 Tertiary activities
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 157
3.2 Economic Activities 3.2 Economic Activities
occupations, people began to exchange goods in the form of bartering. Later on, 
they started using metal, salt and paper money as the medium of exchange. 
Differentiation of products, surplus of production, demand for commodities, 
differences in culture, adequate transport facilities and suitable world conditions 
are the main bases of trade. 
Transportation
What sorts of transportation systems are available in your area? How do you 
explain the usefulness of transportation in the world in general and in Ethiopia 
in particular? 
Transportation facilitates the movement of people, commodities, and mail. 
Nowadays, the types and quality of transportation have made much progress. This 
has enabled people to travel longer distances in shorter times than ever before. 
Also, the flow of ideas, beliefs and innovations has become faster and wider. 
Over the year, faster means of transportation have been introduced, and now 
distances which used to take days or months to cover can be covered in a matter 
of minutes or hours. The rapid progress in transportation and other forms of 
communications have made places all over the earth functionally closer to each 
other. 
Good transportation systems are needed to move goods within a country and 
abroad. They are also essential to spreading the benefits of health care and 
education. 
There are many ways in which goods and people can be transported. In many areas 
of the world, human porters and animals like horses, donkeys, camels, etc. are the 
main means of transportation. These are, however, limited to local business. In 
international business interaction, fast and efficient means of transportation are 
necessary because of the huge quantities of commodities involved. These include 
land, water and air transport. The main transportation systems are road, railway, 
inland waterways, oceans and airways. 
Each of these has its own advantages and the ideal situation for a country is to 
have a network of systematically coordinated transport links. 
Grade 9 Geography 158
3.2 Economic Activities
Activity 3.13
Discuss the following questions in your group. 
1 Why do you use transportation?
2 Which one of the transportation systems is the most common one? 
3 Give at least three examples of land transportation system.
4 Is transportation a tertiary economic activity? Why? 
Communication 
Which form of communication is the most modern communication system? 
The word communication involves the transmission of words and messages from 
one place to another. The following are the major types of communications: 
Mail: This includes the distribution of letters, pakages as well as money. 
Example: Postal services 
Telephone: is a telecommunications device that transmits and receives sound, 
most commonly the human voice. Telephones are a point-to-point communication 
system whose most basic function is to allow two people separated by large 
distances to talk to each other. Example: Mobile phone, land line telephone.
Figure 3.11 Addis Ababa Gotera Interchange Ring Road
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 159
3.2 Economic Activities 3.2 Economic Activities
Radio: It is one of the most important means of communication. All over the 
world, information is transmitted using radios, with the help of electromagnetic 
waves. 
Television: It is a means of communication used to transmit messages using 
both images and sounds. Nowadays, it is possible to receive information and 
entertainment via TV from any corner of the world with the help of satellites. 
Internet and other modern communications tools: by using satellites and 
other electronic equipment like the computer and telephone, new methods of 
communication have been introduced to the world. Some of them include fax, 
e-mail and internet.
Activity 3.14
Discuss the following questions in your group:
1 What are the different modes of communication?
2 What are the different types of communication devices?
Tourism
What is tourism? 
Tourism is a collection of activities, services and industries that delivers a 
travel experience, and they include transportation, accommodations, eating and 
Figure 3.12 Internet network 
Grade 9 Geography 160
3.2 Economic Activities
drinking establishments, retail shops, entertainment businesses, activity facilities 
and other hospitality services provided for individuals or groups travelling away 
from home.
Tourism is a source of both job opportunities and income. It is known as a 
‘smokeless industry’. The main tourist attractions include natural and humanmade features. The following are some of the reasons for tourism:
F site-seeing;
F conferences;
F sport activities, such as skiing, mountaineering, boating, yachting, 
fishing, hunting, swimming, etc; 
F health purposes – for example to secure fresh air and sunshine and 
sometimes to bathe in hot springs etc;
F research; 
F religious ceremonies. 
Features that encourage the development of a tourist industry include:
F good weather conditions; 
F beaches, scenery (scenic attractions) or physical landscape features; 
F services, such as bathing, boating, recreation, hotels, restaurants, etc. 
F accessibility (transport facilities); 
F interesting features (historical sites, parks, etc).
Hadar Lalibela
Tiya
Harar
Omo Valley
Gondar
Axum
Figure 3.13 Some tourist sites of Ethiopia 
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 161
3.2 Economic Activities 3.2 Economic Activities
Activity 3.15
In your small group, discuss the following questions.
1 What is the importance of tourism?
2 What are the benefits of tourism to our economy?
3 What is the difference between tourism and the tourism industry? 
D Quaternary Economic Activities 
What are the major quaternary economic activities practiced in your locality? 
The quaternary sector may realistically be seen as an advanced form of service 
activity involving specialized knowledge, technical skills, communication ability, 
or administrative competence. These activities include education, research, 
development, financial services and government activities. These are the activities 
performed in office buildings, elementary and university classrooms, hospitals 
and doctors’ offices, theatres and television stations. They are activities primarily 
concentrated in large urban places and require higher levels of education than 
the other sectors. This section also includes other pure services, such as the 
entertainment industry. 
Tertiary Economic Activity: Trade 
Whole sellers and retailers sale the nished 
industrial products to individual consumers. 
Whole sellers and retailers sale the semi nished 
industrial products to individual consumers. 
Secondary Economic Activity: Manufacturing 
Manufacturing industries such as air craft/automobile industries use iron, 
aluminium, and other minerals to produce air planes or vehicles. 
Primary Economic Activity: Mining 
Minerals, such as iron, aluminium, coal, etc are extracted from the earth’s crust. 
They serve as raw material for manufacturing industries. 
Figure 3.14 The relationship among primary, secondary and tertiary 
economic activities
Grade 9 Geography 162
3.2 Economic Activities
Activity 3.16
In pairs, discuss the following questions.
1 What is a quaternary economic activity? 
2 Which of the following is a quaternary economic activity? 
F mining, 
F food processing,
F research and development. 
E Quinary Economic Activities 
What are quinary economic activities? Is there any difference between 
quaternary and quinary economic activities? 
Quinary economic activities are generally considered to be a sub-set of quaternary 
activities and are those that involve high-level decision making and scientific 
research skills. It is also a sub-division of the tertiary sector representing the 
special and highly paid skills of top business executives, government officials, 
research scientists, financial and legal consultants, and the like. These people 
find their places of business in major metropolitan centres, in and near major 
universities and research centres. 
3.2.2 Land Use 
Concept and Meaning of Land Use
What is land use? How is land use information presented?
Land use refers to the human activities which are directly related to land, making 
use of its resources, or having an impact on it. Land has many functions and must 
be managed to meet the needs of people. 
The term land use has both rural and urban aspects. Land use automatically 
involves the concepts of optimizing land use potential, and of land-use planning. 
Land use may vary in nature and in intensity according to both the purpose it 
serves (Example: for food production, recreation, or mining) and the biophysical 
characteristics of the land itself. 
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 163
3.2 Economic Activities 3.2 Economic Activities
Land is one of our most precious assets. It provides food and shelter, it stores 
and filters water, and it is a base for urban and industrial development. Land 
is, however, finite in quantity. The combination of population growth, limited 
expansion of arable land, and the growing need for land for non-agricultural 
purposes increases competition for the available space.
Land is also, constantly under threat of degradation, mainly as a result of intensive 
cropping, mining, poor management, and population pressure.
Land Use in Ethiopia
How is the land in Ethiopia being used? For what purpose is most of the land 
used in Ethiopia?
Of the total land area of Ethiopia, 21 percent is under cultivation and 51 percent is 
pasture. It is also estimated that over 60 percent of the cultivated area is cropland. 
Alternative land uses include grazing land, fallow land, woodland and land for 
other purposes.
Inaccessibility, water shortage, and prevalence of disease-causing insects, mainly 
mosquitoes, prevent the use of large parcels of potentially productive land. In 
Ethiopia’s lowlands, for example, the presence of malaria-causing mosquitoes 
keeps away farmers from settling in such areas.
Most agricultural producers are subsistence farmers with small holdings, often 
broken into several plots. Most of these farmers live in the Ethiopian highlands, 
mainly at elevations of 1,500 to 3,000 meters. 
The population in the lowland peripheries is pastoralist, engaged mainly in 
livestock rearing. Sandy desert soils cover much of the arid lowlands in northeast 
and southeast Ethiopia. Because of low rainfall, these soils have limited 
agricultural potential, except in some areas where rainfall is sufficient for the 
growth of natural forage at certain times of the year. These areas are used by 
pastoralists who move back and forth into the area looking for pasture for their 
animals.
Grade 9 Geography 164
3.2 Economic Activities
Activity 3.17
In pairs, discuss the following questions.
1 State three factors which influence land use changes in Ethiopia.
2 What is the difference between land use and land utilization?
Driving Forces in Changing Land Use
What are the physical, economic and social determinants of land use?
Land use is influenced by two types of driving forces. These are human and 
natural or environmental. Land use changes can move in two directions: either 
negatively, leading to land degradation and loss of (production) potential, or 
positively, resulting in a higher value or potential.
Influences on land use include: 
F local culture; 
F different economic activities; 
F environmental conditions (soil quality, terrain, and moisture availability);
F land policy and development programs (agricultural programs, road 
building, zoning); 
F Past humanactivitieson the land (landdegradation,irrigationand roads). 
Afro-alpine Shrubland
Grassland
Bareland
Cultivation
Plantation
Urban
Woodland
Natural Forest
Highland Bamboo
Wetland
Figure 3.15 Ethiopian land use 
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 165
3.2 Economic Activities 3.2 Economic Activities
Rural Land Use versus Urban Land Use
What are the differences between land use in urban and rural areas?
Land use, as the product of human activity on the earth’s surface, shows a very 
large variation, within both local towns and regional cities. Land use varies from 
area to area. In this regard, the following table try to show land utilization of rural 
and urban area:
Rural Urban
F Settlements are scattered.
F Most areas are used for farming, 
forestry, pasture. 
F Settlements are closely constructed.
F Most areas are used for housing, 
industry, transportation, and other 
businesses.
 Exercise 3.2
I Determine whether each of the sentences is True or False.
1 Fishing is a secondary economic activity concerned with the catching of 
fish and other marine creatures.
2 Power production is one type of secondary economic activity.
3 The tertiary sector of industry involves the provision of services to other 
businesses as well as final consumers.
4 The quaternary sector consists of economic activities which involve the 
highest level of decision making in a society or economy.
5 Tourism is a type of primary economic activity.
II Match items in column ‘B’ with items in column ‘A’.
A B
6 Forestry 
7 Processing 
8 Tourism 
9 Consultation 
10 High-level decision making 
 
A Tertiary economic activity
B Primary economic activity
C Quinary economic activity
D Secondary economic activity
E Quaternary economic activity
Grade 9 Geography 166
3.2 Natural Resources
III Choose the correct answer.
11 The types of human activities can be broadly grouped into several major 
groups of economic activities. To which does the extractive sector belong to?
A Secondary
B Tertiary
C Primary
D Quaternary
12 One of the following is not a primary economic activity.
A Trade 
B Agriculture 
C Forestry 
D Mining
13 One of the following is a characteristics of manufacturing activities.
A It requires large capital investment and involves mass units of 
production
B Large number of employees are engaged
C They involve a high degree of division of labor
D All are correct answers
14 Which of the following is not a tertiary economic activity?
A Wholesale trade 
B Tourism 
C Transportation 
D Construction
15 Which of the following is influential in changing land use?
A Environmental condition 
B Local culture
C Land policy and developmental program 
D All are correct
3.3 NATURAL RESOURCES
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ define the concept of natural resources;
Þ classify natural resources into renewable and non-renewable;
Þ state the direct and indirect uses of natural vegetation;
Þ identify Ethiopia’s common woods used for construction purposes;
Þ select Ethiopia’s woods potentially significant for furniture and other 
purposes;
Þ recognize the economic significance of wild animals;
Þ show appreciation of the varied uses of minerals, and
Þ express the importance of soil.
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 167
3.2 Natural Resources 3.3 Natural Resources
Key Terms
³ conservation 
³ renewable resources 
³ non-renewable resources 
³ natural resources 
³ natural vegetation 
3.3.1 Concept
Can you list some of the materials that people use from their environments? 
What do we call the materials that people use from the environment to meet 
their needs? 
Natural resources occur naturally within environments when those environments 
exist in their natural forms, relatively undisturbed by people. A natural resource 
is often characterized by the amount of biodiversity that exists in various 
ecosystems. Natural resources are derived from the environment. Many of 
them are essential for human life, while others are used for satisfying our wants. 
Natural resources include fertile soil, clean water, minerals, wildlife, vegetation, 
and energy sources. People use all these resources to improve their lives.
Activity 3.18
In pairs, discuss the following questions. 
1 What are natural resources?
2 How do people use resources to make a living?
3 How does overusing resources threaten the environment?
4 What effects do human activities have on natural resources?
Types of Resources 
How are environmental resources classified? What is the difference between 
renewable and non-renewable resources?
In the content of renewability, natural resources can be categorized as follows:
1 Renewable resources: are types of resources that can be replaced as they 
are used. They can be replaced naturally or grown fairly quickly. Forests, 
water, soil, plant and animal life all can be renewable resources if people 
manage them carefully. The renewable resources are replaceable in 
character since they are able to reproduce themselves. For example, forest 
is a renewable resource that can produce timber and other forest products 
year after year if it is carefully and scientifically managed.
Grade 9 Geography 168
3.3 Natural Resources
2 Non-renewable resources: As their name suggests, non-renewable 
resources cannot be replaced once they have been used. The most important 
example of non-renewable resources are the fossil fuels like, coal, oil and 
natural gas and minerals. These resources are generally non-replaceable in 
character.
Resources are not evenly distributed throughout the world. There is a great 
disparity in the distribution of natural resources. This unevenness in the 
distribution of natural resources has led to the notion of the “have and have nots” 
nations, although the total resource quantities of the world have not yet been 
adequately determined.
Through out the world, people cut more and more trees and mine more minerals. 
This has led to the occurrence of environmental problems. Sometimes, resources 
are misused, as a result their quantities become smaller and smaller. This process 
is called environmental degradation. To overcome this problem, renewable and 
non-renewable resources should be wisely or sustainably used. 
Now adays a number of people believe that the earth’s resources are being over 
used and some times misused. If this situation continues uncontrolled, many of 
the resources will be lost or will deteriorate. Unless something is done quickly, 
we will face disasters. 
In order to overcome this problem, people in many parts of the world practice 
different resource-conservation measures. Such practices help to maintain the 
volumes of resources and make them last longer.
Activity 3.19
Copy and complete the table, which is about the types of environmental resources.
Types of Resources Definition Examples
Renewable resources 
Non-renewable resources 
3.3.2 Importance of Natural Resources 
A Natural Vegetation 
What are the direct and indirect uses of natural vegetation?
When you observe your surroundings, you may see different types of plants. 
Some of these plants might have been planted by people and others might have 
grown naturally. Those which grow naturally are known as natural vegetation.
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 169
3.3 Natural Resources 3.3 Natural Resources
The term natural vegetation refers to the original cover of plants of a region 
resulting from normal conditions of climate, soil, drainage and other natural 
conditions. The vegetation of a region can be modified to a marked extent by 
people, because of agricultural or urban development. The following are the 
direct and indirect uses of natural vegetation.
Direct use Indirect use
F Serves as a source of energy such as 
fuel wood, charcoal etc. 
F Serves as a source of industrial raw 
materials such as gums, lumber, nuts 
etc. 
F Serves as source of construction 
materials. 
F Serves as a source of food such as 
nuts, fruits, roots, leaves, barks etc.
F Serves as a source of income.
F Regulates local climatic conditions.
F Maintains the balance of nature.
F Maintains soil fertility and regulates 
soil erosion.
F Serves as habitats for wild animals.
F Provides aesthetic value (adds 
beauty to the natural environment).
The natural vegetation in Ethiopia is a most important source of raw materials for 
the construction and furniture industries. Among the most common woods that are 
used for these purposes are juniperus (tid), podocarpus (zigba), Aningeria (kerero), 
Arundineria (kerkaha), olea (weira), wanza, tikur inchet and bamboo.
Bamboo is one type of natural vegetation. In the world there are over 1,200 
different species of bamboo forest. The highland bamboo species is one of the 
Figure 3.16 Natural Vegetation
Grade 9 Geography 170
3.3 Natural Resources
types of Ethiopian bamboo. This species grows naturally in the ecological zone 
of the country that is between 2200 – 3500 meters above sea level.
Alpine bamboo has traditionally been used as a material for making fences and 
water pipes, as well as a variety of handicraft, items. The culms are used by 
cottage industries for woven and plaited products such as basketry, mats, and 
other decorative items.
Ethiopian highland bamboo also has been used for manufacturing industrial 
products such as parquet flooring, window blinds, and curtains. It is also useful 
for bio-energy. 
 Figure 3.17 Ethiopian highland Bamboo
Activity 3.20
Perform the following tasks in your group. 
1 List the types of plants or trees that are commonly found in your area. Write 
their names in the local language and English.
2 Identify economic importance of Ethiopian woods, like bamboo and ‘Wanza’ 
trees.
B Wild Animals
What are wild animals? Have you ever seen wild animals? 
Wildlife includes all wild living creatures, large or small. Mammals, birds, fish, 
reptiles, amphibians and insects are regarded as wildlife.
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 171
3.3 Natural Resources 3.3 Natural Resources
These animals are important for many reasons. Among the most common 
important functions of wild animals for human beings are the following.
F Source of food
F Source of industrial raw materials
F Scientific and educational purpose
F Maintaining the balance of nature
F Add beauty to the environment (aesthetic value)
F Source of individual and national income
C Minerals
What are minerals used for?
A mineral is an element or a combination of elements. It is either inorganic or 
organic chemical elements or compounds found naturally in the crust of the earth.
Figure 3.18 Wild animals 
Grade 9 Geography 172
3.3 Natural Resources
Minerals are useful in many ways. The major uses of minerals are as follows:
F Minerals are raw materials for a variety of manufacturing establishments. 
For example, iron, copper and tin are used in the production of many 
types of manufactured goods.
F Some minerals are sources of energy that is used to run machinery. 
Examples: coal, petroleum and natural gas.
F Some minerals are used for making fertilizers. These include minerals 
like phosphates, sulphur, potash, and nitrates.
F Some minerals are used directly as materials in building construction. 
Such minerals include limestone, marble, granite, clay, etc.
F Some minerals are used for both aesthetic and ornamental purposes. 
For example, silver and platinum are used in the minting of coins as 
well as for other industrial purposes. Diamonds, gold and some others 
are useful ornamental minerals. 
D Soil
What is soil? What are soils used for? What are the parent materials of soil?
Soil is a natural resource consisting of layers of mineral constituents of variable 
thicknesses. It is composed of particles of broken rock that have been altered 
by chemical and environmental processes that include weathering and erosion. 
Soil differs from its parent rock due to interactions between the lithosphere, 
hydrosphere, atmosphere, and the biosphere. It is a mixture of mineral and 
organic constituents that are in solid, gaseous and liquid states. The following are 
the major uses of soil:
F Soil is used in agriculture, where it serves as the primary nutrient base 
for plants. The types of soil used in agriculture vary with respect to the 
species of plants that are cultivated.
F Soil resources are critical to the environment and food production. 
Soil provides minerals and water to plants. Soil absorbs rainwater and 
releases it later, thus preventing floods and drought. Soil cleans the 
water as it percolates through. Soil is the habitat for many organisms.
F The biological component of soil is extremely important for the carbon 
sink. Even in desert areas, bacteria, lichens and mosses capture a 
significant amount of carbon by photosynthesis. Restoring the world’s 
soils could offset some of the huge increase in greenhouse gases which 
is causing global warming, while improving crop yields and reducing 
water needs.
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 173
3.3 Natural Resources 3.3 Natural Resources
 Exercise 3.3
I Determine whether each of the sentences is True or False.
1 Renewable natural resources are types of resources that can be replaced as 
they are used.
2 Natural resources are evenly distributed throughout the world.
3 Mineral fuel is a renewable natural resource.
4 Plants and animals are renewable natural resources.
5 Regulate local climatic condition is the direct use of natural vegetation.
II Choose the correct answer.
6 One of the following is not a renewable natural resources.
A Coal
B Forest
C Soil
D Water
7 What do people use in order to satisfy their needs?
A Natural conservation
B Natural resources 
C GNP
D None of the above
8 One of the following explains the importance of wild animals. They are 
important for:
A Maintaining the balance of nature
B Source of industrial raw material
C Source of food
D All are correct
9 Which of the following is a non-renewable natural resources?
A Wild animals
B Gold
C Air
D Soil
10 The wise use of natural resource is _______.
A Degradation
B Misused
C Destruction
D Conservation
Grade 9 Geography 174
Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY
Þ Human population refers to the number of people living in a definite area.
Þ The world’s population has been experiencing continuous increases since 
the 15th century. As some sources indicate, by 1750 there were only about 
791 million people in the world. However, 250 years later, the world’s 
population reached over 6 billion.
Þ Population data refer to population information, such as number, age, 
marital status, births and deaths, occupation, religion, educational status, 
and other characteristics of the human population. Censuses, sample 
surveys and vital registration are among the most commonly used methods 
of gathering information about human populations.
Þ Population distribution is the way that a population is spread out over a 
given area, whether a small region or the earth as a whole. This distribution 
of population forms a pattern. While some areas are densely populated, 
others are sparsely populated. 
Þ There are densely, moderately and sparsely populated areas in the world. 
There are three main population belts of high population density and 
concentration in the world. These include the Asiatic population belt, 
peninsular Europe and Northeastern North America. On the other hand, 
there are thinly populated areas. These areas include tundra, hot-dry 
lands, hot-wet lands, high relief and areas with poor soil. 
Þ A settlement is a place in which people live, carrying out a variety of 
economic activities such as trade, agriculture and manufacturing. There 
are many types of settlements that include hamlets, villages, towns, cities, 
metropolises, and megalopolises. 
Þ Settlements are broadly divided into rural and urban.
Þ Economic activity is the production and distribution of goods and services. 
Some of the activities are hunting, fishing, farming, grazing, mining, 
manufacturing, transportation, trade and others.
Þ The various economic activities practiced in the world, may be arranged 
into 5 groups, namely primary, secondary, tertiary, quaternary and quinary.
Þ The main types of primary economic activities include agriculture, forestry, 
fishing and mining.
Þ Secondary economic activities include manufacturing, construction and 
power production.
Unit 3: Human Population and Economic Activities 175
Unit Review
Þ The tertiary sector involves the provision of services to other businesses as 
well as to final consumers. It includes tourism, transportation, trade, etc.
Þ Quaternary economic activities include education, research, development, 
financial services and government activities.
Þ Quinary economic activities are a sub-set of quaternary activities and are 
those that involve high-level decision making and scientific research skills.
Þ Land use refers to human activities which are directly related to land, 
making use of its resources, or having an impact on it.
Þ Of the total land area of Ethiopia, 21 percent is under cultivation and 51 
percent is pasture the Forest land of the country accounts for less than 3 
percent of the total land area.
Þ Local culture, different economic activities, environmental conditions land 
policy and development programs and past human activity are driving 
forces that change land use.
Þ Land use varies from area to area. In rural areas, land use can include 
forestry and farming. On the other hand, in urban areas land use could be 
housing, industry, transportation and business administration.
Þ Natural resources occur naturally within the environments and exist 
relatively undisturbed by humans, in their natural forms.
Þ Natural resources are derived from the environment. Many of them are 
essential for human life, while others are used for satisfying our wants.
Þ Renewable resources are types of resources that can be replaced as 
they are used. These renewable resources can be replaced naturally or 
grown fairly quickly. Forests, water, soil, and plant and animal life all can 
be renewable resources if people manage them carefully.
Þ Non-renewable resources cannot be replaced once they have been 
used. The most important examples of non-renewable resources are the 
fossil fuels, coal, oil and natural gas and minerals.
Þ Natural vegetation can be used directly or indirectly.
Þ Juniperus (tid), podocarpus (zigba), Aningeria (kerero), Arundineria 
(kerkaha), Olea (weira), wanza, Tikur inchet and bamboo are common 
Ethiopian woods that are used for construction purposes.
Þ Bamboo woods are potentially significant for furniture.
Þ Wild animals can be used as sources of food, sources of industrial raw 
materials and also sources of individual and national income.
Þ Minerals are useful in many ways. The major uses of minerals are as raw 
materials for manufacturing industries, sources of energy, and making of 
fertilizers.
Þ Soil is used in agriculture. 
Grade 9 Geography 176
Unit Review
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 3
I Choose the correct answer.
1 Which of the following pairs of continents have contrasting population 
situations?
A Europe and North America
B Africa and Asia 
C Asia and Oceania
D Africa and Europe
2 The highest population concentration in the world is in ________.
A Asia 
B South America
C Europe
D Australia
3 Which one of the following affects the quality of population data?
A Fertile soil 
B Adequate water supply 
C Double entry
D Doubling time
4 Of the following, one is the most densely populated region in the world.
A Latin America
B Australia
C Asiatic population belt
D Africa
5 Of the following, one is a primary economic activity.
A Forestry 
B Trade
C Tourism
D Refineries
6 Which one of the following refers to a tertiary economic activity?
A Processing raw materials
B The production of services 
C The provision of services
D The production of raw 
materials
7 The service sector of human economic activities is designated as:
A Secondary
B Quaternary
C Primary
D Tertiary
8 The most common rural residential pattern in the world’s agricultural areas is:
A Dispersed 
B Nucleated
C Spaced
D Hierarchical
II Explain the following terms.
9 Primary economic activity
10 Secondary economic activity
11 Mining