In the previous unit you learned about human population and economic activities. 
The current unit is about public issues and policy related issues in Ethiopia. The 
unit has three sections: HIV/AIDS, Environmental Policy and Economic Policy.
Ethiopia belongs to the countries of sub-Saharan Africa that are heavily affected 
by HIV/AIDS. The first case of HIV in Ethiopia was reported in 1986. Since then, 
HIV/AIDS has become a major public health concern in the country. In 2007, 
the estimated adult HIV/AIDS prevalence in Ethiopia was 2.1 percent. Although 
the expansion of the epidemic is currently stable, HIV/AIDS remains a major 
development challenge for Ethiopia. Poverty, food shortages, and other socioeconomic factors amplify the impact of the epidemic. According to UNAIDS, 
approximately 980,000 Ethiopians were infected with HIV/AIDS in 2007, and 
67,000 individuals had died as a result of infection with the virus.
The aim of environmental policies and programs are to protect the environment 
from natural and human-made problems. Ethiopia has formulated environmental 
policies and programs which protect the environment by law. The law is designed 
to protect soil, water, forest, and minerals.
4.1 HIV/AIDS
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ analyze the global prevalence of HIV/AIDS;
Þ explain the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Ethiopia;
Þ reflect upon the impact of HIV/AIDS in Ethiopia; and
Þ decide to join the school anti-HIV/AIDS club to alleviate the prevalence of 
HIV/AIDS in Ethiopia. 
Key Terms
³ HIV
³ AIDS
³ Orphan
³ Epidemic
³ Antiretroviral
³ Pandemic
³ Vulnerable 
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 179
4.1 Hiv/aids 4.1 Hiv/aids
Start-up Activity 
1 What is HIV/AIDS? 
2 What should be done in order to overcome the HIV/AIDS pandemic? 
3 What are the major means of transmission of HIV/AIDS? Discuss with your friends. 
The Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) is the virus that causes Acquired 
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). HIV destroys the natural ability of the 
human body to fight off opportunistic infections such as tuberculosis (TB). A 
person infected with HIV can stay for a long time without showing any symptoms. 
The spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic has emerged as one of the most critical 
problems of the population of the world, causing a high level of deaths as well as 
social and economic problems. So far, no cure has been found nor has a vaccine 
been developed. 
There are many ways in which a person can be infected with HIV/AIDS. In all 
cases, the virus can get into a person's body if there is direct contact of body fluids 
such as blood from the infected person.
Focus
The most common ways of contracting an HIV/AIDS infection are through: 
F Unsafe or unprotected sexual intercourse. 
F Shared use of items such as needles, blades and other sharp objects. 
F Transfusion of infected blood, 
F Unsafe delivery and breast feeding.
However, it must be noted that you cannot get infected with HIV/AIDS by sitting, 
eating, swimming or shaking hands, etc. with a person who is HIV-positive. 
You cannot tell whether a person is infected with the virus by looking at his or her 
physical appearance. The only way to know if a person has the virus is through 
a blood test. A person whose blood test shows an infection with HIV/AIDS is 
referred to as HIV-positive.
HIV/AIDS Around the World
What are impacts of HIV/AIDS at the global level?
During 2008, some 2.7 million people in the world became infected with the HIV, 
Grade 9 Geography 180
4.1 Hiv/aids
which causes AIDS. The year also saw 2 million deaths from AIDS, a high global 
total, despite antiretroviral (ARV) therapy, which reduced AIDS-related deaths in 
the population that received it. 
Around half of the people who acquire HIV become infected before they turn 25 
years of age, and AIDS is the second most common cause of death among 20-24 
year old. By the end of 2007, the epidemic had left 15 million AIDS orphans, 
defined as those aged under 18 who have lost one or both parents to AIDS. These 
orphans are vulnerable to poverty and exploitation and to becoming infected with 
HIV themselves. They are often forced to leave the education system and find 
work, and sometimes to care for younger siblings or to head a family.
In the same year, around 430,000 children, aged 14 or younger, became infected 
with HIV. More than 90 percent of newly infected children are babies born to 
women with HIV, who acquire the virus during pregnancy, laboring or delivery, 
or through their mother's breast milk. Over nine-tenths of such transmissions 
occur in sub-Saharan Africa. 
In terms of the AIDS epidemic, the area in Africa, south of the Sahara Desert, 
known as sub-Saharan Africa, is by far the worst-affected in the world. The region 
has just over 10 percent of the world's population, but is home to 67 percent 
of all people living with HIV. An estimated 1.9 million adults and children 
became infected with HIV during 2008. This brought the total number of people 
infected with HIV/AIDS in the region to 22.4 million by the end of the year. 
HIV prevalence varies considerably across this region − ranging from less than 1 
percent in Madagascar to over 25 percent in Swaziland.
In sub-Saharan Africa, AIDS killed approximately 1.4 million people in 2008. 
Average survival in the absence of treatment is around 10 years after infection. 
Oceania 59,000
North America 1.4m
Caribbean and
Latin America
Sub-Saharan
Africa
Middle East and
North Africa
Eastern Europe
and Central Asia
East, South and
South-East Asia
Western and 
Central Europe 850,000 4.65m
1.5m
22.4m
310,000
2.24m
67%
4.5%
<1% 4%
14%
2.5%
6%
1%
Figure 4.1 Distribution of people living with HIV around the world, in 2008
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 181
4.1 Hiv/aids 4.1 Hiv/aids
Antiretroviral (ARV) drugs can dramatically extend survival, allowing many 
years of healthy life, but these drugs remain unavailable to most Africans.
Unlike women in most other regions in the world, African women are more 
likely at least 1.4 times – to be infected with HIV than men. There are a number 
of reasons why female prevalence is higher than male in this region, including 
the greater efficiency of male-to-female HIV transmission through sex and the 
younger age of initial infection for women.
HIV/AIDS in Ethiopia
Can you describe the prevalence and trend of HIV/AIDS in Ethiopia?
The first evidence of HIV infection in Ethiopia was recognized in the early 1980’s. 
The first two AIDS cases were reported in 1986. Since then, the disease has spread 
at an alarming rate. The primary mode of HIV transmission in Ethiopia is sexual 
contact. Even though of small magnitude at present, the next most common 
modes of infection are harmful indigenous practices and unsafe injections. These 
major causes for the spread of the virus, require due attentions. 
Activity 4.1
Discuss the following questions in your group.
1 Is HIV/AIDS curable? What should you do to protect yourself from this disease? 
2 What is the status of HIV/AIDS in Ethiopia? Is it an increasing or decreasing 
phenomenon?
3 Can you explain how the HIV/AIDS pandemic affects individuals, families and 
the society at large? 
4 How, do you think, participation in anti-HIV/AIDS clubs contributes to the fight 
against the problem?
The 2010 report of the Federal HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Office 
(FHAPCO) indicated that the current national adult prevalence rate in Ethiopia 
was about at 2.4 percent. The prevalence varies in urban (7.7%) and rural areas 
(0.9%). There are about 1.2 million people infected with HIV/AIDS in the 
country. Out of these, 90,311 are pregnant women, and 79,871 are children. The 
number of orphaned children due to AIDS is estimated at 804,184. The number 
of deaths due to AIDS in 2010 is estimated at 28,073. 
Grade 9 Geography 182
4.1 Hiv/aids
Impacts of HIV/AIDS
What are the impacts of HIV/AIDS in general?
HIV/AIDS has several multifaceted impacts on humanity. So far, it has shortened 
life expectancy and caused an increase in tuberculosis. It has increased hospitalbed occupancy and depleted the productive work force as well as intensified food 
insecurity in Ethiopia. 
AIDS also has large social, psychological, demographic, and economic impacts 
on both individuals and societies. In addition to the painful stress, disability and 
death that AIDS causes to the individual patients the family, social and economic 
problems that follow are many and varied. Such problems include divorce, family 
disintegration, orphaned children, etc. AIDS destroys the prime productive-age 
group and their children with death rates much higher than usual. When it affects 
large population groups it can diminish the quality and quantity of the labor 
force, leading to social and economic crisis in the community. The social tension 
and sense of hopelessness that follow are some examples of the psychological 
impacts of HIV/AIDS. 
Vulnerability
Who are the most affected people in Ethiopia?
Women, young commercial sex workers, and orphans and children in general are 
the most vulnerable groups in Ethiopia. Women, due to economic, educational 
and biological factors as well as various harmful traditional practices, such as 
female circumcision and body scarification, are considered more vulnerable than 
men. Age, emotional development and financial dependence as well as poverty 
and lack of awareness about the disease, are major factors of vulnerability among 
the youth. 
Impacts of HIV/AIDS
Social
 Divorce
 Family breakup
 Orphan hood
 Stigma
 Discrimination
 School dropout
Economic
 Affects the labor force
 Dependency
 Sectoral shift
 Declined productivity
 Loss of skilled labor
Psychological
 Stress
 Hopelessness
 Loneliness
 Feeling guilty
Demographic
 Increased mortality 
 Structural shift
 Shortens life expectancy
 Decrease population number
Individual
 Sickness
 Healthcare expense
 Disability
 Death
Figure 4.2 Impacts of HIV/AIDS
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 183
4.1 Hiv/aids 4.1 Hiv/aids
Activity 4.2
Discuss the following questions in your group.
1 What kinds of responsibilities do you think citizens should have for controlling 
and combating the HIV/AIDS epidemic? 
2 In your opinion, what roles should teachers and students play to help control 
the expansion of the HIV/AIDS pandemic in Ethiopia?
 Exercise 4.1
I Determine whether each of the following sentences is true or 
false. 
1 A person who is infected with HIV can stay for a long time without showing 
any symptoms. 
2 HIV/AIDS is only transmitted through sexual intercourse.
3 It is possible to tell whether a person is infected with the HIV/AIDS virus 
by looking at his or her physical appearance. 
4 A person whose blood test shows an infection with HIV/AIDS is referred 
to as HIV-negative.
II Choose the correct answer. 
5 When was the first evidence of HIV infection in Ethiopia recognized? 
A In the late 1970’s
B In 1990
C In the early 1980’s
D In 2000
6 Which one of the following is a demographic impact of HIV/AIDS? 
A Orphanhood
B Stress
C Dependency
D Shortens life expectances 
7 Which one of the following is not true about HIV/AIDS? 
A has shortened life expectancy 
B has caused an increase in tuberculosis incidents 
C has increased hospital-bed occupancy 
D None of the above 
Grade 9 Geography 184
4.2 Environmental Policy
8 Which of the following age groups of the population is highly affected by 
HIV/AIDS?
A infants
B The older population
C The younger population
D children 
9 Of the following geographic areas, which one is highly infected by 
HIV/AIDS? 
A Western Europe and North America 
B The caribbean and Pacific regions 
C South and southeast Asia 
D Sub-Saharan Africa 
10 Which one of the following activities is extremely dangerous regarding the 
transmission of HIV/AIDS? 
A Re-use of blades
B Kissing
C Re-use of injections
D Unprotected sex 
4.2 ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ adhere to implementation of Ethiopia’s environmental policy. 
Key Terms 
³ deforestation 
³ policy
³ sustainable
What is environmental policy? What is the importance of environmental policy? 
Environmental policies are guidelines formulated for a wise use of environmental 
resources. They help us to form systematic conservation techniques, which help to 
minimize miss use of resources. Most solutions for major conservation problems 
are derived from environmental policies. The main goal of these policies is the 
protection of the environment from natural and human-made problems. 
When people use natural resources to make a living, they affect the environment. 
The unwise use of resources is a threat to the environment. Many human activities 
can cause pollution, putting toxic or poisonous substances into the land, water, 
and air. 
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 185
4.2 Environmental Policy 4.2 Environmental Policy
Land and water: chemicals that farmers use may increase the productivity 
of their crops but some also damage the land. Pesticides or chemicals that kill 
insects, can pollute rivers and ground water. Illegal dumping of dangerous waste 
products also causes problems. Untreated sewage reaching rivers pollutes lakes 
and groundwater as well. 
Air: Industries and vehicles that burn fossil fuels are the main sources of air 
pollution. Throughout the world, fumes from cars and other vehicles pollute the 
air. The chemicals in polluted air can seriously damage people’s health. These 
chemicals, combined with precipitation, may fall as acid rain, or rain carrying 
large amount of sulphuric acid. Acid rain corrodes the surfaces of buildings, kills 
fish, and can destroy entire forests. 
Energy: Developed nations and developing nations both need safe and dependable 
sources of energy. Fossil fuels are most often used to generate electricity, heat 
buildings, run machinery, and power vehicles. Fossil fuels, however, are nonrenewable resources. In addition, they contribute to air pollution. 
Activity 4.3
In your group, discuss the following questions. 
1 How do farmers pollute the environment? 
2 What natural and human-made factors cause environmental pollution?
3 How can you help control pollution? 
4 How can industries harm the environment?
These days, the above-mentioned problems are becoming very serious. Therefore 
Ethiopia has launched a policy of environmental protection.
The Objectives (Goals) of the Environmental Policy of 
Ethiopia
What are the specific environmental policy objectives of Ethiopia?
The overall policy goal of Ethiopia’s environmental policy is to improve and 
enhance the health and quality of life of all Ethiopians and to promote sustainable 
social and economic development through the sound management and use of 
natural, human-made and cultural resources or of the environment as a whole. This 
Grade 9 Geography 186
4.2 Environmental Policy
goal aims at meeting the needs of the present generation without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. 
Specific Policy Objectives 
The specific objectives of the environmental policy of Ethiopia are to:
F Promote development that is sustainable and optimize resource use and 
management opportunities. 
F Ensure that environmental concerns are explicitly addressed and 
incorporated into the decision-making process. 
F Develop, implement and measure programs that promote management 
systems for the environment. 
F Prevent, minimize or offset the adverse impacts of municipal waste and 
other potential pollutants. 
F Prevent the adverse effects of developmental proposals that may 
generate hazardous substances or wastes. 
F Raise public awareness and promote understanding of the essential 
linkages between environment and development.
Activity 4.4
In pair, discuss the following question. 
1 List and discuss some objectives of the Ethiopian environmental policy. 
2 Do you think that people, including students and teachers, should be involved 
both in the formulation and implementation of such policies? Why or why not? 
Sectorial Environmental Policies 
Not all countries of the world have similar environmental problems. The policies 
also differ among countries. For example, in developed regions, environmental 
problems are the results of industrialization. On the other hand, in developing 
countries of the world, major environmental problems include deforestation, soil 
degradation, wildlife destruction and misuse of water resources. Therefore, the 
environmental policies of the developing countries focus on such problems. 
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 187
4.2 Environmental Policy 4.2 Environmental Policy
The environmental policies of Ethiopia related to major resources are summarized 
as follows.
Policy Related to Soil and Agriculture 
F To base, where possible, increased agricultural production on sustainably 
improving and intensifying existing farming systems by developing and 
disseminating technologies which are biologically stable, appropriate 
under the prevailing environmental and socio-cultural conditions for 
farmers, economically viable and environmentally beneficial. 
F To ensure that planning for agricultural development in corporates in 
its economic cost-benefit analysis the potential costs of soil degradation 
through erosion and salinization as well as soil and water pollution. 
F To safeguard the integrity of the soil and to protect its physical and 
biological properties, through management practices for the production 
of crops and livestock which pay particular attention to the proper 
balance in amounts of chemical and organic fertilizers, including green 
manures, farm yard manures and compost. 
F To promote the use of appropriate organic matter and nutrient 
management for improving soil structure, nutrient status, soil 
conservation and land husbandry. 
F In order to safeguard human and environmental health, prepare 
regulation of agricultural (crop and livestock) chemicals.
Policy related to Forest, Woodland and Tree Resources 
F To recognize the complementary roles of communities, private 
entrepreneurs and the state in forestry development.
F To encourage all concerned individuals and communities as well as the 
government to be actively involved in the planning and implementation 
of forestry programs to ensure sustainability, minimize cost, and 
forestall (prevent) conflict. 
F To ensure that forestry development strategies integrate the development, 
management and conservation of forest resources with those of land and 
water resources, energy resources, ecosystems and genetic resources as 
well as with crop and livestock production. 
F To pursue agricultural and other policies and programs that will reduce 
pressure on fragile woodland resources and ecosystems.
F To promote changes in agricultural and natural-resource management 
systems which will limit the need for free grazing of animals in protected 
forest areas. 
Grade 9 Geography 188
4.2 Environmental Policy
Policy related to Genetic, Species and Ecosystem Biodiversity 
F To promote the involvement of local communities inside and outside 
protected areas in the planning and management of such areas. 
F To ensure that the conservation of biological diversity outside the 
protected-area system be integrated with strategic land use plans, 
local level plans and sustainable agricultural and pastoral production 
strategies. 
Policy related to Water Resources 
F To promote the protection of the interface between water bodies and 
land (example: lake shores, river banks and wetlands). 
F To involve water resource users, particularly women and animal 
herders, in the planning, design, implementation and follow up in their 
localities of water policies, programs and projects so as to carry them 
out without affecting the ecological balance. 
F To subject all major water conservation, development and management 
projects to the environmental impact assessment process and to include 
the cost and benefits of protecting watershed forests, wetlands and 
other relevant key ecosystems in the economic analysis of such water 
projects.
F To promote, through on-site training, effective water management 
techniques at the farm level for improved performance of medium to 
large-scale irrigation schemes. 
Policy related to Energy Resources
F To adopt an inter-sectoral process of planning and development which 
integrates energy development with energy conservation, environmental 
protection and sustainable utilization of renewable resources. 
F To locate, develop, or adopt energy sources and technologies to replace 
biomass fuel. 
Policy related to Mineral Resources: 
F To provide technical and material assistance to artisan miners to 
improve environmental protection and output efficiency. 
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 189
4.2 Environmental Policy 4.2 Environmental Policy
F To encourage and support small-scale miners to practice mining which 
is organized and responsible so as to be consistent with environmental 
laws, rules and regulations to safeguard the well-being of the land and 
its other natural resources. 
F To advise and train mining communities in methods of environmental 
protection and reclamation of abandoned mining areas. 
F To prepare and enact specific mining environmental protection legislation.
Policy related to Industrial Waste
F To establish clear linkages between the control of pollution and other 
policy areas including water resources, agriculture, human settlements, 
health and disaster prevention and preparedness. 
F To provide adequate regulation of agricultural (crop and livestock) 
chemicals and micro-organisms. 
F To ensure that pollution control is related to the potency, longevity and 
potential to increase or reproduce the pollutant. 
Activity 4.5
In your group, discuss the following questions.
1 What do you think the role of the community should be in protecting natural 
resources? 
2 Are there industries in your locality? If yes, where do they dispose their waste? 
Inside water bodies or in the open field? Do you think their waste-disposal 
activities are right or wrong? Why? 
3 Are forests, wildlife and soils legally protected in your area? What happens to 
people who misuse these resources? 
4 Is there an environmental club in your school? If so, discuss its activities in 
protecting the environment. If not, what do you think such a club should do? 
Grade 9 Geography 190
4.2 Environmental Policy
 Exercise 4.2 
I Determine whether each of the following sentences is true or 
false. 
1 Fossil fuels are the main sources of air pollution. 
2 All countries of the world have similar environmental problems. 
3 The environmental policies of the developing counties focus on only 
industrialization. 
4 The unwise use of resources is a threat to the environment. 
II Choose the correct answer. 
5 Which one of the following is not an environmental problem? 
A Deforestation
B Soil degradation
C Wildlife depletion
D Reforestation 
6 Which of the following is true about the environmental policy of Ethiopia?
A It encourages increased agricultural production through sustainable 
methods by improving and intensifying existing farming systems. 
B To locate, develop or adopt energy resources and technologies to 
replace biomass fuel. 
C To recognize the complementary roles of communities, private 
entrepreneurs and the state in forestry development. 
D All are correct. 
7 In terms of the objectives of the environmental policy, which one of the 
following countries is different from the others? 
A Netherlands
B France
C England
D Kenya 
8 Ethiopia’s environmental policy came into effect in the decades of the
A 1980’s B 1970’s C 2000’s D 1990’s
9 Which of the following is given lesser attention in the environmental 
policies of Ethiopia?
A Soil protection
B Urban development
C Forest protection
D Water pollution
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 191
4.2 Environmental Policy 4.3 Economic Policy Of Ethiopia
10 To which of the following problems do the environmental policies of 
developed countries pay the most attention? 
A Water pollution
B Forest destruction
C Industrial wastes
D Soil degradation 
4.3 ECONOMIC POLICY OF ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ realize the contribution of the economic policy of Ethiopia for development.
Key Terms
³ non-agriculture 
³ domestic market 
³ geothermal energy 
What is an economic policy? What types of economic policy does Ethiopia have? 
Economic policy refers to the action that governments take in the economic field. 
It covers the system for setting interest rates and government budget as well as 
actions related to the labor market, national ownership and many other areas of 
government intervention in the economy. Such policies are often influenced by 
international institutions as well as political ideology. 
Types of Economic Policy
Types of economic policy include: 
F Macroeconomic stabilization policy; 
F Trade policy; 
F Policies designed to create economic growth;
F Policies related to development economics; 
F Industrial policy. 
An economic development plan (policy) provides the general objectives, 
priorities, and different phases of development and organization and the major 
policies and measures to be adopted. Based on the new economic policy, the 
Grade 9 Geography 192
4.3 Economic Policy Of Ethiopia
Ethiopian government formulated a long-term economic development strategy 
known as Agricultural-Development-Led-Industrialization which was devised 
to stimulate the country’s underdeveloped economic structure. It is a two-sided 
strategy, integrating:
F the external sector (export-led) 
F the internal sector which explains the forward and the backwardrelationship between agriculture and industry.
The Objectives (Goals) of the New Economic Policy of Ethiopia
F Changing the role of the state in the economy.
F Mobilizing external resources to the development efforts of the country.
F Involving regional administrations in economic management. 
F Promoting public participation in development.
F Promoting private investment. 
Sectorial Economic Policies 
Policy Related to Agriculture and Food Production 
F Increased extension and research services with extension packages that 
provide better solutions to respond to farmers’ needs. 
F Adoption of new rural land proclamations in the four largest regions of 
the country. 
F Shifting of the rural labor force from agricultural to non-agricultural 
activities, which would improve productivity and ease the population 
pressure on rural land. 
Policy Related to Industrial Sector 
This emphasized the development of the manufacturing sector which produces 
materials mainly for domestic markets. 
Policy Related to Energy
The energy sector policy stresses the need for the expansion of hydro-power, the 
exploitation of geothermal energy and the sustainable utilization of traditional 
energy sources.
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 193
4.3 Economic Policy Of Ethiopia 4.3 Economic Policy Of Ethiopia
Policy Related to Transport/Communication 
The transport and communication policy focus on the expansion of facilities, 
especially rural roads, the improvement of construction material supply and 
ultimately self-sufficiency, planned and coordinated development of urban social 
services. 
Policy Related to Education
The main objective of the education policy is to improve the relevance and 
quality of teaching methods and materials and to foster student success and 
equity. Upgrading standards, through the provision of educational abilities and 
instructional materials as well as upgrading the quality of teachers by way of preservice and in-service training are major efforts to be made. 
The overall goal of the educational policy of Ethiopia 
F To improve quality.
F Increase student access to educational opportunities at the primary 
level and to achieve universal primary education by the year 2015. 
F To enhance efficiency and use resources wisely. 
F To address equity issues by narrowing the gap between male and female, 
among regions, and between rural and urban areas.
F To provide increased access to Adult and Non-Formal Education in 
order to combat the problem of adult illiteracy.
F To increase access to quality secondary education based on the demand 
of the economy for skilled human resources and the intake capacity at 
the tertiary level. 
In Technical and Vocational Education and Training/TVET
F To provide relevant and demand-driven education and training that 
corresponds to the needs of economic and social sectors for employment 
and self-employment by re-orienting and re-focusing the existing TVET 
system.
F To assure the quality of TVET training programs. 
F To enable TVET institutions to generate their own income and thereby 
reduce government allocations to the sub-sector. 
Grade 9 Geography 194
4.3 Economic Policy Of Ethiopia
In Tertiary Education
F To develop responsible and competent citizens who meet the nation’s 
quantitative and qualitative demand for a high-level trained labor force 
based on the socio-economic needs of the country.
F To set up cost-effective, efficient and results-oriented systems and 
develop modern and effective human-resource management procedures 
and practices.
F To develop the volume, quality and relevance of research and consultancy 
services directed to the needs of the country.
 Policy Related to Health 
The health policy focuses on primary and preventive health measures, with a new 
five year policy of health delivery, based on community-level services.
In order to achieve the Health Sector Developmental Program, the following 
strategies have been designed:
F Vigorous implementation of the Health Service Extension Program 
for the effective prevention and control of communicable diseases and 
promotion of healthy living;
F Enhancing the capacity of district health offices in the expansion of 
Public Health Centre (PHC) facilities and services;
F Improving the quality of health care through provision of adequate 
resources, implementation of a two-way referral system, and enhancing 
the capacity of Health Education Workers (HEWs) for the detection, 
referral and follow-up of patients. Strengthening secondary and tertiary 
hospitals and referral laboratories;
F Improving the number, skills, distribution and management of health 
workers;
F Ensuring the planned training of health managers in adequate numbers 
and providing them with appropriate knowledge and skills;
F Mobilizing adequate financial resources, ensuring their efficient 
utilization, and strengthening sustainable financing mechanisms for the 
health sector;
F Improving the health information system and the capacity for effective 
monitoring and evaluation;
F Ensuring full community participation in the planning, implementation, 
monitoring and evaluation of health care;
F Promoting and coordinating the activities of the public sector, private 
sector, international organizations and NGOs in health intervention.
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 195
4.3 Economic Policy Of Ethiopia 4.3 Economic Policy Of Ethiopia
 Exercise 4.3
I Determine whether each of the following sentences is true or 
false. 
1 Economic policy can be influenced by international institutions as well as 
political ideology.
2 The main objective of the educational policy of Ethiopia is to improve 
relevance, quality, success and equity. 
3 One of the objectives of the new economic policy of Ethiopia is strengthening 
government control on the economy.
4 In the new economy policy of Ethiopia the health policy focuses on primary 
and preventive health measures. 
II Choose the correct answer. 
5 In the objectives of the new economic policy of Ethiopia, which one of the 
following is NOT included? 
A Promoting private investment 
B Continuing the role of the government in the economy 
C Involving regional administration in economic management 
D Promoting the participation of the population in developmental 
sectors 
6 Which of the following are NOT the prime objectives of the new economic 
policy of Ethiopia. 
A Promoting population participation in the development process of the 
country 
B Changing the role of the state in the economy 
C Minimizing private investment both in the national and regional 
economy 
D Involving regional administration in managing the economy
7 Which one of the following refers to the current long term development 
strategy of Ethiopia?
A Industrial-development-led agriculture 
B Giving priority to the development of energy resources 
C Agricultural-development-led industrialization
D Making the economy dependent on mining rather than on agriculture
Grade 9 Geography 196
Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY
Þ The spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic has emerged as one of the most 
critical problems of the population of the world, causing a high level of 
deaths as well as social and economic problems.
Þ In terms of the AIDS epidemic, the area in Africa south of the Sahara desert, 
known as sub-Saharan Africa, is by far the most-affected in the world. The 
region has just over 10 percent of the world's population, but is home to 67 
percent of all people infected with HIV/AIDS.
Þ The primary mode of HIV transmission in Ethiopia is sexual contact. There 
are about 1.2 million people infected with HIV/AIDS in the country.
Þ HIV/AIDS has shortened life expectancy and caused an increase in 
tuberculosis incidents. It has also increased hospitals’ bed occupancy and 
depleted the productive forces as well as aggravated food insecurity in 
Ethiopia.
Þ Environmental policies are guidelines formulated for a wise use of 
environmental resources.
Þ The overall policy goal of Ethiopia’s environmental policy is to improve and 
enhance the health and quality of life of all Ethiopians, and to promote 
sustainable social and economic development through the sound 
management and use of natural, human-made and cultural resources or 
of the environment as a whole.
Þ Economic policy refers to the action that governments take in the economic 
field. It covers the system for setting interest rates and government budget 
as well as actions regarding the labour market, national ownership and 
many other areas of government intervention in the economy.
Þ Based on the new economic policy, the Ethiopian government formulated 
a long-term economic development strategy known as AgriculturalDevelopment-Led Industrialization which was devised to stimulate the 
country’s underdeveloped economic structure.
Unit 4: Public and Policy related Issues in Ethiopia 197
Unit Review
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 4
I Determine whether each of the following sentences is true or false.
1 HIV/AIDS is curable.
2 A person can be infected with HIV/AIDS because of sitting, eating, 
swimming or shaking hands with a person who is HIV-positive. 
3 A person whose blood test shows an infection with HIV/AIDS is referred 
to as HIV-positive.
4 Environmental policies are guidelines formulated for the misuse of 
resources.
5 The main objective of the new Ethiopian Economic Policy is to change the 
role of the state in the economy.
II Choose the correct answer.
6 Which one of the following is not true about HIV/AIDS?
A HIV/AIDS is a non-communicable disease.
B A person can be infected with HIV for a long time without showing 
any symptoms.
C The first case of HIV in Ethiopia was reported in 1986.
D HIV/AIDS can be transmitted through unsafe sex.
7 Which of the following is/are the most common route of HIV/AIDS 
infection? 
A Unsafe or unprotected sexual intercourse. 
B Shared use of items such as needles, blades and other sharp objects. 
C Transfusion of infected blood, unsafe delivery and breast feeding
D All are correct
8 The primary mode of HIV transmission in Ethiopia is ________.
A Unsafe delivery and breast feeding
B Sexual intercourse
C Safe sex
D Abstinence
9 Whcih one of the following is/are an impact of HIV/AIDS?
A Decline productivity
B Increased mortality
C School dropout increases
D All are correct
Grade 9 Geography 198
Unit Review
10 Among the following populations, the most vulnerable group is/are
A Women
B Youth
C Commercial sex workers
D All are correct
11 One of the following is not an objective of the environmental policy of 
Ethiopia
A Develop programs that promote management systems for the 
environment.
B Promote development that is sustainable and optimize resource use 
and management opportunities.
C Minimize the adverse impacts of municipal waste and other potential 
pollutants.
D None of the above.
12 One of the following is not an environmental problem in developing 
countries.
A Deforestation 
B Soil degradation 
C Environmental problem as the result of industrialization
D Wildlife destruction
13 Which of the following is the main goal of the environmental policies of 
Ethiopia?
A Minimizing the use of natural resources
B Prohibiting people from using natural resources
C Protecting natural resources from wastage
D Ending exploitation of natural resources
14 Which point is not stated in the new economic policy of Ethiopia? 
A increase imported goods
B encourage private investment
C increase rate of industrialization
D promote better utilization of resources
15 Which one of the following is not a component of the economy policy of 
Ethiopia? 
A Trade policy
B Population policy
C Industrial policy
D Agricultural policy
