The universe is the totality of space and cosmos, in which everything is found. 
All heavenly bodies, including all stars, together with the sun, comets, meteors, 
planets and their satellites are found in the very vast space called the universe. 
A galaxy is a large group of stars. The universe contains many galaxies. The 
Milky Way is our galaxy. Within the Milky Way is our solar system. A solar 
system, is a smaller group of heavenly bodies, which includes the sun at the 
center and the nine planets and their satellites and asteroids.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 53
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Activity 2.1
Fill in the blank spaces with the appropriate words or phrases.
1 The star from which we get light and heat is the ________. 
2 The galaxy, of which our solar system is part, is ________. 
2.1.1 The Origin and Structure of the Earth
The Origin of the Earth
Why is earth special? 
The earth's origin is related to the process of formation of the solar system. Some 
scientists believe that the solar system, of which the earth is part, formed from 
a large flammable of hot whirling gases. The flammable was loosely packed 
gases, largely hydrogen and helium, and dust particles about 4.6 billion years 
before the present. The gases and dust particles gradually drew together because 
of gravitational pull and formed a thin disc. The disc, in due course, split into 
rings and kept spinning. The spinning rings at the center formed the sun, while 
the outer rings resulted in the formation of the nine planets, including the earth.
The earth is one of the 
nine planets that, along 
with the others, revolves 
around the sun. The 
orderly nature of our 
solar systems leads most 
researchers to conclude 
that the earth and the 
other planets formed at 
the same time and from 
the same material as the 
sun.
The solar system is the sun and the objects that are traveling around it. The objects 
around the sun include nine planets. Planets are objects that travel around a star in 
a path. That path is called an orbit. 
Figure 2.1: The Solar System
Uranus
Pluto
Neptune
The Solar System
Mercury
Venus
Saturn
Mars
Earth
Jupiter
Grade 10 Geography 54
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
The Structure of the Earth
Is the Earth a solid planet? Liquid? Gas? 
Human lives on the surface of a globe that has a radius of nearly 6500 km, yet 
no one has ever penetrated more than a few kilometers below the solid earth. 
Geophysicists have inferred that the earth is composed of a great central core and 
a series of surrounding layers, known collectively as the mantle, and the crust 
(Figure 2.2). 
The Earth's Crust 
The crust is the outermost and thinnest layer. Because it is relatively cool, the 
crust consists of hard, strong rock. Crust beneath the oceans differs from that of 
continents. Oceanic crust is between 4 and 7 kilometers thick and is composed 
mostly of dark, dense basalt. In contrast, the average thickness of continental 
crust is about 20 to 40 kilometers, although under mountain ranges it can be as 
much as 70 kilometers thick. Continents are composed primarily of light-colored, 
less dense granite. Relative to its size, Earth’s crust is about as thin as an apples 
skin about 0.01 percent in volume. 
The Mantle
The mantle lies directly below the crust. It is almost 2900 kilometers thick and 
makes up 80 - 84 percent of the earth’s volume. Although the chemical composition 
is similar throughout the mantle, the earth’s temperature and pressure increase 
with depth. These changes cause the strength of mantle rock to vary with depth, 
and thus they create layering within the mantle. 
2900 km
Mantle
Outer core
Crust
6370 km
2900 km
Inner
core
Figure 2.2: Different layers of the earth's interior (after Tarbuck Lutgens, 2005) 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 55
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
The Core
The core is the innermost layer of the earth. It is a sphere with a radius of about 
3470 kilometers, and is composed largely of iron and nickel. The outer core 
is molten because of the high temperature at the center of the core. The core’s 
temperature is about 6000o
C, which is as hot as the sun’s surface. The pressure is 
more than 1 million times that of the earth’s atmosphere at sea level. The extreme 
pressure compresses the inner core into a solid, despite the fact that it is even 
hotter than the molten outer core. About 15 percent of Earth’s volume is an iron 
- nickel core the size of Mars. 
Activity 2.2
I Match the items in column A with items in column B.
A B
1 Crust a Continental crust 
2 Mantle b 2900 kilometers
3 Molten c Largely iron and nickel
4 Basalt d Magma
5 Core e the thinnest layer 
6 Granite f Oceanic crust
II Answer the following questions:
7 Which layer constitutes about 80 percent of the volume of the earth?
8 In which part of the earth are you living?
9 Which layer of the earth account about 15% of the earth’s volume?
10 What makes the mantel develop different layers? 
11 What is the solar system? 
12 How many degree Celsius the core temperature measured? 
2.1.2 The Geological Time Scale and Major 
Geological Events
What is the geological time scale? How old is the earth? When did life first 
evolve?
The geological time scale is a record of earth's history, starting with earth's 
formation about 4.5 billion years before the present. Numbers on the time scale 
represent time in millions of years before the present. 
Grade 10 Geography 56
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Geologists have divided the earth’s history into four major eras and each era into 
a number of periods, to which specific names have been assigned. The periods 
are further divided into epochs. The scheme of subdivisions is based upon 
various aspects and events of the earth’s history, such as widespread occurrences 
of strong tectonic activity, the appearance or disappearance of particular forms 
of life, or extensive changes in environmental conditions. The eras are major 
divisions of the geological time scale. They are defined based on differences in 
the life forms that existed. 
There are four eras:
F The Precambrian 
F The Paleozoic, whose name means ancient life 
F The Mesozoic, or middle life 
F The Cenozoic, or recent life
The periods, which are subdivisions of eras, are defined in the same manner, 
based on differences in the life forms that existed. The periods of the Cenozoic 
are divided into epochs.
The Precambrian Era
When did the Precambrian era take place?
The Precambrian era is the longest geological time unit of Earth’s history. It 
comprises 88% of the geological time scale. It lasted from 4.5 billion to about 
600 million years before the present. 
Little is known about the earth and the organisms that lived during this era. Rocks 
have been buried deeply and changed by heat and pressure. The Precambrian 
rocks formed foundation rocks in many parts of the world. Because of great 
pressure and heat, they transformed from either sedimentary deposits or volcanic 
origin rock types to metamorphic type rock, which is crystalline in nature.
The Paleozoic Era
What is the major event of the paleozoic era?
The beginning of the Paleozoic era is marked by the presence of the first organisms, 
ancient life with hard parts. This era began about 600 million years ago. Warm 
shallow seas covered much of earth’s surface during the early Paleozoic era. 
Because of this, most of the life forms were of marine origin (lived in oceans).
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 57
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
The Mesozoic Era
Which animal species was dominant in the Mesozoic era? 
The Mesozoic era, the era of “middle” life, began about 250 million years before 
the present. At the beginning, all continents were joined as a single land mass 
that we call Pangaea. It separated into two large land masses during the Triassic 
period. The northern mass and southern mass, respectively, were Laurasia and 
Gondwanaland. Reptiles were the dominant animal life form in the Jurassic period. 
 
The Cenozoic Era
What is unique about the Cenozoic era?
The Cenozoic era is the era of recent life, which began about 70 million years ago, 
when dinosaurs and many other life forms became extinct. Many of the mountain 
ranges began to form. The climate became cooler, and ice ages occurred.
The present-day period is the Quaternary. We live in the Holocene epoch, which 
began after the last ice age. Our species, Homo Sapiens, probably appeared about 
500,000 years ago, but became a dominant animal only about 10,000 years ago.
Figure 2.3: The breakup of Pangaea over 200 million 
years (After Tarbuck and Lutgens, 2005)
Grade 10 Geography 58
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
2.1.3 Geological events in Ethiopia
What do you know about geological events in Ethiopia? What happened during 
the cenozoic era in Ethiopia?
The whole of Africa essentially consists of a basement of ancient crystalline rock. 
During the Precambrian era, Ethiopia was made up of huge mountains which 
were folded and faulted. During the Paleozoic era, the land was greatly affected 
by persistent denudation (erosion) and peneplanation. In many parts of Ethiopia, 
there was no significant rock formation in this era. 
At the beginning of the Mesozoic era, the land surface sank, very slowly. As 
a result, the sea invaded the land from the southeast towards the northwest. In 
this process, layers of sandstone and limestone were deposited, one over the 
other. The layers of sandstone, referred to as Adigrat sandstone, were formed 
first, followed by deposition of layers of limestone called Hintalo limestone. 
Gradually, the landmass which was under the sea started uplifting, and the land 
emerged out of the sea toward the end of Mesozoic era. Following this, the 
sea started to retreat in the southeast direction, and it deposited other layers of 
sandstone called Upper sandstone. Hence, by the end of the Mesozoic era, many 
parts of Ethiopia were covered by the three layers of Mesozoic marine sediment.
During the Cenozoic era, Ethiopia experienced two major geological events:
i The uplift of the Ethiopian landmass, followed by crustal deformations 
and the emission of an immense lava flow, Trapean (old) lava series, 
to the surface. This process produced the Ethiopian highlands.
ii During the middle tertiary, the land was subjected to major vertical 
displacements, which produced the formation of the Ethiopian 
Rift Valley. This divided the Ethiopian highlands into the Western 
Highlands and the Southeastern Highlands. 
In the quaternary period, the earth experienced a marked climatic change resulting 
in rains known as the Pluvian Rains in Africa. During this period the Ethiopian 
plateaus were affected by heavy erosion. 
Later on, the heavy rains were replaced by a dry climate which increased the rate 
of evaporation. As a result the rift valley lakes were reduced in size. 
Within the Afar depression, there was believed to be a large lake. Due to absence 
of rivers flowing into the lake and a continuous rate of evaporation, it disappeared. 
Finally, salt, potash and pockets of saline water were left behind. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 59
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Activity 2.3
I Give short answers.
1 In which era and period did layers of sandstone form in Ethiopia? What are 
these layers called? 
2 In which era was Ethiopia subjected to continuous erosion? 
II Match the words in column B with the phrases in column A.
A B
3 Record of events in Earth history.
4 Geologic time with poorest fossil record.
5 The geological era in which we live. 
6 Dinosaurs rose and became extinct during 
this era.
7 Most of the life forms were marine origin. 
A Cenozoic era
B Precambrian time
C Mesozoic
D Geological time scale
E Paleozoic era 
III Critical Thinking
8 Why do we say that the Rift Valley region of Ethiopia is the most geologically 
unstable area in the country? 
9 Identify some existing geological processes occurring along and in the 
Ethiopian Rift Valley System, and identify manifestations which indicate the 
unstable situation of the region. 
10 Prepare a geographic newsletter on current developments of the Ethiopian Rift 
System.
2.1.4 The Movement of Continents
Continental Drift 
What is continental drift? What is plates tectonics? What makes the lithosphere 
plate move?
The idea that continents, particularly South America and Africa, fit together like 
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle originated with the development of reasonably accurate 
world maps (Figure 2.4). Little attention was given to this idea until 1915, when 
Alfred Wegener, a German meteorologist, polar explorer and visionary, who lived 
between 1880 and 1930, published a book titled The Origin of Continents and 
Oceans. In his book, Wegener set forth the basic outline of his radical hypothesis 
of continental drift.
Grade 10 Geography 60
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Wegener suggested that once there was a single supercontinent, a huge landmass, 
that he called Pangaea (pan = all, gaea = Earth). Wegener further postulated 
that during the Mesozoic era, about 200 million years ago, the supercontinent 
(Pangaea), which centered upon Africa, began to break apart into two. He called 
them Gondwanaland (which consisted of South America, Africa, the Arabian 
Peninsula, the Indian subcontinent, Australia and Antarctica) and Laurasia which 
included the North America and Eurasia. At a later stage, the two broke farther 
apart into smaller continents, which then 'drifted' to their present positions. This 
idea was common and remained popular until very recently. 
2.1.5 Components of the Earths Physical 
Environment
Basically the physical environment of the earth can be divided into four major 
parts: the water portion of the planet, (the hydrosphere), Earth's gaseous 
envelope, (the atmosphere), and the solid Earth, (the lithosphere). But it should 
be noted that our physical environment is highly integrated and not dominated by 
rocks, water, or air alone. Rather, it is characterized by continuous interactions as 
air comes in contact with rocks, rocks with water, and water with air. 
Furthermore, the biosphere, which is the totality of all plant and animal life on our 
planet, interacts with each of the three physical realms and is an equally integral 
part of the planet. Thus, the earth can be thought of as consisting of four major 
spheres: the hydrosphere, the atmosphere, the lithosphere and the biosphere.
A The Hydrosphere
What percentage of the hydrosphere forms streams and lakes? 
The hydrosphere includes all of the earth’s water, which circulates among oceans, 
Africa
South America
Figure 2.4: 
The West African coastlines 
and eastern coastlines of South 
America appear to fit together like 
adjacent pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. 
The pink areas show locations 
of distinctive rock types in South 
America and Africa. (After Tarbuck 
and Lutgens, 2005)
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 61
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
continents and the atmosphere. The oceans are the most prominent features of the 
hydrosphere, covering nearly 71 percent of the globe, to an average depth of about 
3.8 kilometers. They account for about 97 percent of Earth's water. About 1.8 
percent of the earth’s water is frozen in glaciers. The hydrosphere also includes 
the 0.63 percent of the earth’s water that is found underground, saturating the 
rock and soil of the upper few kilometers of the geosphere. Only 0.01 percent of 
the hydrosphere forms streams and lakes. 
B The Atmosphere
What do you know about the atmosphere? 
What percentage of the atmosphere is concentrated within 6 km altitude? 
The earth is surrounded by a life-giving gaseous envelope called the atmosphere. 
It is a mixture of gases, mostly nitrogen and oxygen, with smaller amounts of 
argon, carbon dioxide and other gases. One-half of the mass of the atmosphere 
lies below an altitude of 5.6 kilometers, and 90 percent occurs within just 16 
kilometers. About 99 percent is concentrated in the first 30 kilometers above the 
surface of the earth.
C Biosphere
What are the life forms that exist in the biosphere? 
The biosphere is the zone inhabited by life. It is concentrated near the surface 
in a zone that extends from the ocean floor upward for several kilometers into 
the atmosphere. It includes the uppermost lithosphere, the hydrosphere, and the 
lower parts of the atmosphere. 
D Lithosphere 
What makes the top of the lithosphere? 
Lying beneath the atmosphere and the oceans is the solid earth, referred to as the 
lithosphere. The lithosphere consists of three major layers: the crust, mantle 
and core (see Figure 2.5). The outermost layer is a thin layer called the crust. 
Below a layer of soil and beneath the ocean water, the crust is composed almost 
entirely of solid rock.
Grade 10 Geography 62
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
The mantle lies beneath the crust. Although the mantle is mostly solid rock, it is so 
hot that it contains small pools of liquid rock called magma. The third and innermost 
layer is a dense, hot, partly molten core composed mainly of iron and nickel.
Focus
Note that the earth, which is part of the solar system, consists of four 
subsystems: atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, and biosphere. To 
these may be added the anthroposphere, which is that part of the earth on 
which humans have made their cultural imprint. 
Components of the Lithosphere
Rocks 
What are rocks? How are they formed? 
Rocks are a naturally formed solid aggregate of one or more minerals. 
Crust
Earth radius
6370 km
Oceanic
crust
(4 - 7 km thick)
Asthenosphere extends to a depth of 350 km
Continental 
crust
(20 - 70 km thick)
Lithosphere
(125 km)
Lithosphere (75 km)
Lithosphere
Mantle - 2900 km thick
Liquid outer core - 2250 km thick
Solid inner core - radius 1220 km
Figure 2.5: The layers of the 
lithosphere
Each of these layers is further 
subdivided. The crust consists of 
continental and oceanic crust. The 
uppermost mantle is hard solid 
rock, like the crust, while the rest of 
the mantle is hot, weak and plastic. 
The core consists of an outer liquid 
region surrounding a solid center.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 63
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Types, Formation and Characteristics 
Geologists group rocks into three main categories called igneous, sedimentary, 
and metamorphic rocks.
1 Igneous Rocks 
What is the origin of igneous rocks? 
Igneous rocks (ignis = fire) form when the molten rock cools and solidifies, either 
in the crust or on the surface of the earth. 
Igneous rocks come from melted rock deep in the earth, where it is very hot. 
The melted rock is called magma. The hot rock moves up through cracks in 
the earth’s crust. Sometimes the magma cools and hardens before it gets to 
earth’s surface. Sometimes the hot rock breaks out, or erupts, on the surface. 
Magma that gets to the surface is called lava.
Types of Igneous Rocks 
There are two main groups of igneous rocks: intrusive and extrusive igneous 
rocks.
i Extrusive igneous rocks: Sometimes, when magma breaks through and 
erupts onto the relatively cool surface of the earth, it solidifies rapidly. 
Because it cools quickly when it reaches the earth’s surface the molten 
rock, called lava, solidifies rapidly, and there is insufficient time for large 
crystals to form. As a result, many extrusive rocks have fine-grained 
textures, consisting of crystals too small to be seen with our eyes. An 
abundant and important example is basalt and obsidian (see Figure 2.6). 
Figure 2.6: Extrusive igneous Rocks (A) Basalt is a finegrained volcanic rock and (B) Obsidian is natural volcanic 
glass. containg in no crystals.
(A) (B)
Grade 10 Geography 64
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
ii Intrusive (plutonic) igneous rocks:
When magma solidifies within the 
crust, the magma cools slowly, and 
the crystals form over hundreds of 
thousands to millions of years. As 
a result, most plutonic rocks are 
coarse-grained. Granite is the most 
abundant rock in continental crusts. 
It is coarse-grained, and the crystals 
are clearly visible.
2 Sedimentary Rocks 
What is unique about sedimentary rocks? 
Sedimentary rocks are made of small particles of matter, or sediments, of 
weathered rocks. They may be shells or other remains of living things. Water, 
wind and ice picked up sediment and transported it. Eventually they dropped the 
sediment in places where it collected into layers. 
Most common sedimentary rocks are formed when sediment is compacted or 
cemented together. The weight of layer upon layer of sediment on top of each 
other compacts or squeezes sediment together to form sedimentary rocks.
Figure 2.7: Granite Granite is the most 
common coarse-grained igneous rock.
Figure 2.8: How sediments 
become solid rock Sediments 
become solid rock by compaction 
and cementation.
sands
water
A
B
C
D
new sediments
sandstone
sandstone
sand
coal
sand
peat
shale
mud
particles settle 
in layers
sea floor
sea floor
sea level sea level
A Before compaction
B Before
After compaction
After
A
B
C
D
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 65
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Types of Sedimentary Rocks
Which type of sedimentary rocks constitute 85 percent of all sedimentary rocks? 
About 5 percent of the earth’s crust is made up of sedimentary rocks. They are 
broadly grouped into four categories: clastic, chemical, bioclastic and organic 
sedimentary rocks.
i Clastic sedimentary rocks: They are composed of fragments of weathered 
rocks called clasts, which were transported and deposited, and then 
cemented. Clastic rocks make up about 85 percent of all sedimentary rock 
(Figure 2.9). This category includes sandstone, siltstone and shale.
ii Chemical sedimentary rocks: They are formed by direct precipitation 
from minerals in water. The water dries up, leaving layers of these minerals 
that turn into rock. Gypsum and halite (example: rock/table salt) are formed 
in this way. Potash is another type of chemical sedimentary rock. It is 
formed from solutions of certain salts.
iii Bioclastic sedimentary rocks: They are composed of broken shell 
fragments and similar remains of living organisms. The fragments 
are clastic, but they are, of course, of a biological origin. Limestone is 
a sedimentary rock which was formed from the shells of snails. A good 
example of limestone is chalk. 
iv Organic sedimentary rocks: They consist of the solidified remains 
of plants or animals. Coal is an organic sedimentary rock made up of 
decomposed and compacted plants that died millions of years ago. When 
plants die, their remains usually decompose by reacting with oxygen.
Figure 2.9: Sandstone, siltstone 
and shale Sandstone, siltstone, 
and shale are clastic rocks that 
make up more than 85 percent of 
all sedimentary rock. Limestone 
and others make up less than 15 
percent.
Sandstone
15%
Limestone
10%
Shale and siltstone
70%
Other 
less than 5%
Grade 10 Geography 66
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
3 Metamorphic Rocks
What makes metamorphic rocks hard and strong? 
Metamorphic rock results from changes in other kinds of rock. Metamorphic 
rocks are produced from pre-existing igneous, sedimentary, and even other 
metamorphic rocks through heat and pressure inside the earth’s crust. 
Under the influence of heat, limestone and sandstone change, respectively, to 
marble and meta-quartzite. Mudstone and shale change to schist or quartzite, 
respectively, under the influence of both heat and pressure. They change to slate
when subjected only to pressure. See Figure 2.10.
Focus
Rocks are chunks ofsolid minerals. They are the most common and abundant 
materials on Earth. They consist of smaller crystals or grains called minerals. 
Basically one can identify three broad classes of rocks: igneous rocks, which 
are volcanic in origin, sedimentary rocks, which form by compaction and 
cementation of accumulated sediments under pressure, and metamorphic 
rocks that are transformed from volcanic or sedimentary rock, or even other 
metamorphic rock, under high pressure and heat.
Figure 2.10: Metamorphic 
rock Often have a banded 
appearance.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 67
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Activity 2.4
1 In your geography work group, walk around your school compound and its 
surroundings. Collect samples of several types of rocks and bring them back to 
the classroom.
2 Work with your group to write a report about the collection of rock samples. 
Let the report consider each type of rock sample and present answers to the 
following questions. You can format some or all of the report as a chart.
a What color is it?
b Is it shiny?
c Does it break or scratch easily? Use a coin, knife, or other hard object to 
test the sample for this characteristic. Is the rock hard or soft?
d Is it permeable? To test for this characteristic, place the rock in water and 
see whether it absorbs liquid.
e Is it crystalline? To test for this characteristic, examine the rock closely, 
looking for crystals. If you find crystals, are they large or small?
Distribution of Major Rocks in Ethiopia 
Major rocks in Ethiopia include igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks. 
These rocks are found exposed at the surface in different parts of the country. 
There are many other rocks underlying surface rocks. 
Figure 2.11: Distribution of the major outcropping rocks in Ethiopia 
As you can see from the map igneous rocks cover large areas in the central 
part of the country. Eastern Ethiopia is mainly covered with sedimentary rocks. 
Metamorphic rocks are found in the northern, western and southern edges of the 
country. 
Ignious Rocks
Sedimentary Rocks
Metamorphic Rocks
Grade 10 Geography 68
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Soil
Have you ever run barefoot through grass? Have you ever looked at a field of 
corn? Have you ever planted a flower seed in a garden? 
Soil is a unique and vitally important part of the terrestrial ecosystems. It is 
fundamental to continue human existence; without soil we can not grow the 
food we need. Soil is a complex mixture of inorganic minerals, decaying organic 
matter, water, air and living organisms. The earth’s thin layer of soil, utmost only 
a metre or two thick, provides nutrients for plants, which directly or indirectly 
provide the food all animals need to stay alive and healthy. 
Soil Composition
What is soil made of? 
Although soils vary considerably in composition, they all contain the same basic 
components: inorganic materials (minerals), air, water and organic material. The 
inorganic materials in soil are tiny particles. They come from rock fragments that 
have been broken down very slowly over many years. They account for about 
45% of the composition of good-quality soil. Water and air often complement 
each other, and each accounts for 25% . The organic material consists of humus, 
roots, and other living organisms. It represents about 5% of the total. 
Focus
What kinds of things live in soil?
Soil is the loose material of the earth’s surface in which terrestrial plants 
grow. Soil is usually formed from weathered rocks or regolith changed by 
chemical, physical and biological processes. Look closely at and through a 
large quantity of soil. It is full of living creatures. You may see earthworms, 
mites, millipedes, centipedes, grubs, termites, and other large and small 
creatures. Soil is also full of things you can only see under a microscope. 
In the small world of soil, a lot is going on. Worms and other fairly large 
creatures eat decaying parts of plants. Bigger animals eat smaller ones. 
They expel waste into the soil. Microscopic life forms, called bacteria 
and fungi, feed on the bodies of dead animals and reduce them to simpler 
materials that plants can use for food. Decayed plant and animal parts 
create a rich, dark-colored soil called humus.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 69
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Formation of Soil 
Soil formation takes a long time, which is why it is such a disaster when 
soil is washed away in floods: it will take hundreds or thousands of years 
to replace. The basic components of soil are: 
F the inorganic components: rock particles, air, water and mineral salts. 
F the organic components: humus and living organisms 
Types of Soil 
Which soil type is poorly drained and areated? 
There are many different types of soil, which vary in their content of: 
F Clay - very fine, microscopic particles 
F Silt - fine particles 
F Sand - coarse particles 
Soils are classified according to the proportion of these different types of particles. 
Porosity is the major factor controlling the amount of water and air the soil can 
hold and the rate at which water moves through it. 
Sandy soils have relatively large pores and the particles have little tendency to 
clump together. 
Clay soil
sand grains �ne
0
0
1 mm
1 mm
coarse
Sandy soil air soace
�lm of 
water
clay and silt
grains
Figure 2.12: Soil texture 
Look at these two microscopic views of sand 
and clay soils. Notice how much bigger the 
soil grains are in the sand. Large grains, as 
in sand, give a coarse texture. Clay and silt 
soils have a fine texture. A coarse, sandy soil 
allows water to drain through it quickly. Very 
little water is stored by the soil, so it quickly 
dries out. Clay soil is so fine that water has 
difficulty of passing between the grains, so 
these soils easily become waterlogged.
Grade 10 Geography 70
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Sandy soils have good aeration and are easy to work. However, sandy soils 
retain little water, they dry up quickly in hot weather and useful minerals are 
easily washed out of them. This means they are poor in plant nutrients. They are 
useful for growing crops which do not require large amounts of water, such as 
groundnuts. 
Clay soils are made of very small particles, which are easily packed together. 
Clay soils have low porosity, retain water and rich in nutrients. They are poorly 
drained, poorly aerated and difficult to cultivate. Waterlogging, when all the 
pores fill with water, is a common problem. Poor aeration causes the death of 
roots due to lack of oxygen. 
Silt soils: If the particles are smaller than sand, they are called silt. Soil with silt is 
less gritty to the touch and some what sticky when wet. When it is dry, however, 
soil with much silt is usually loose and cruby. Soil with silt accepts water more 
slowly than sandy soil, but more quickly than clay. It also retains water longer 
than sandy soil, but it dries faster than clay. 
The ideal soil is a loam, which is a mixture of sand, clay and silt and contains a 
mixture of particle sizes, and plenty of humus. Such a soil is fertile, it is properly 
aerated and contains adequate supply of mineral and water. 
Major Soil Types of Ethiopia
Which soil type has the largest coverage in Ethiopia? 
FAO, on the basis of predominant chemical and physical properties derived from 
parent materials, has identified about 18 major soil associations in the country. 
Ten of the 18 soil associations are considered in this section, which together 
cover more than 87.4 % of the land area of the country. 
Liptosols alone cover about 29.8% of the total land area of Ethiopia. But together 
with Regosol cover about 30% of the area of the country. These soil groups 
developed on recent lava and young quaternary sediments. They are mostly 
found in a rugged topography and steep slopes. 
Nitosols cover about 12.5% of the area of Ethiopia. The Nitosols develop on 
gently sloping ground. They are basically associated with high rainfall and were, 
probably, formed originally on forest covered areas. But they are now widely 
found on cultivated areas and on mountain grasslands.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 71
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Vertisols: These soils cover about 10 % of the land area of Ethiopia. They mostly 
develop on volcanic plateau. They also develop on sedimentary rocks, and 
alluvial plains. Unlike the Nitosols, which are found in humid areas, Vertisols 
mostly occur in moderate climatic regions and gently slopping grounds.
Luvisols: They cover about 7.8% of Ethiopia and developed mainly in areas 
where pronounced wet and dry seasons occur. Where leaching is not very high, 
they are found in association with Nitosols. 
Fluvisols formed through erosion from the lava plateau of Ethiopia and deposited 
in depressions, lower valleys and lowlands of the country. They are associated with 
fluvial (river), marine (sea) and lacustrine (lake) deposits. Fluvisols are unique 
because their origin depends on the deposition of alluvium (being transported 
from many areas) than on weathering processes. 
Other soils including Cambisols and Calcisols which, respectively, cover 9.4 and 
9.3 of the area of Ethiopia have relatively good physical and chemical properties 
for agricultural production. Gypsisols which cover about 7.6% of Ethiopia occurs 
in the eastern lowlands have limited agricultural potential. Solanchaks are saline 
soils, which develop in areas of high evaporation and capillary action.
Alisols
Andosols
Arenosols
Calcisols
Gypsisols
Leptosols
Lixisols
Luvisols
Nitosols
Phaeozems
Regosols
Solonchaks
Solonetz
Vertisols
Swamps
Water Bodie
Cambisols
Chernozems
Ferralsols
Fluvisols
Soil types of Ethiopia
Figure 2.13: Major Soils of Ethiopia
Grade 10 Geography 72
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Focus
The soils of Ethiopia were basically derived from the rocks of the basement 
complex, Mesozoic old sediments and rocks of Trapean and Aden volcanicseries lavas, including Quaternary sediments. Diversity in topography and 
climate, including biological diversity, heightened the highly fragmented 
(mosaic) nature of soil types in Ethiopia. On the other hand, although 
about 18 different soil groups have been identified in the country, 87% of 
the combined areas of Ethiopia is covered by 10 of them. Further, more 
than half of Ethiopia is covered by vertisols, nitosols, acrisols, lithosols, 
regosols and cambisols. 
Activity 2.5
i Answer the following questions 
1 Which soil is an extremely leached version of nitosols?
2 Which soil group most commonly cover sides of major river gorges, escarpments 
and other very steeply sloped areas?
3 Where are lacustrine deposits found most commonly?
4 If you want run a modern farm, which soil type is your choice? 
5 Which soil types formed from already existing rocks? 
6 How many percent of the hydrosphere water found underground? 
ii Fill in the blanks with appropriate word or phrase 
7 Rocks make up about 85 percent of all sedimentary rock ________.
8 Rocks are dominant in the central part of Ethiopia __________. 
9 Eastern Ethiopia is largely covered by _____ rocks. 
Soil Degradation and Conservation in Ethiopia 
What is soil degradation? What causes soil degradation? Can you list different 
forms of soil erosion? What causes soil erosion and what is the impact of soil 
erosion in Ethiopia? List possible soil-conservation measures for Ethiopia.
A Soil Degradation 
Degradation, in geological terms, means the wearing down of rocks by 
disintegration. It refers to the general lowering of the surface of land by erosive 
processes. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 73
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
In connection with soil, soil degradation refers to a change in the state of soil due 
to increased erosion, leaching and both processes. 
Erosion
Erosion is the term given to the process of the wearing away of soil by natural 
agents (running water, wind, ice, wave action and corrosion) and the transport 
of the rock debris that results. Wind, water and other agents of erosion move the 
eroded particles to some other location, where it is deposited as sediment. Soil 
erosion is a natural process that removes soil from the land. However, human 
activities frequently aggravate this process.
Causes of Soil Erosion in Ethiopia
The causes of soil erosion can be divided into two: physical and human. 
i Physical causes involve a combination of the following physical factors: 
steepness of slope, the intensity, duration and seasonality of rainfall, soil 
type (example, texture) and vegetation cover. 
ii Human causes have to do with human interference with natural processes, 
including deforestation, overgrazing and bad farming practices which 
deplete plant cover, leaving the land exposed and vulnerable to erosion. 
Activities that lead to deforestation include the burning of forests and the 
cutting down of trees faster than the forests can regenerate. 
In Ethiopia, about 1.9 billion tons of topsoil is washed away from the highlands 
every year. The loss of topsoil has been estimated to cost billions of Ethiopian birr 
per year. Since topsoil production rates are so slow, the lost topsoil is essentially 
irreplaceable. 
Badly eroded soil has lost all of its topsoil and some of its subsoil, and it is 
no longer productive as farmland. In Ethiopia, soil erosion has reached critical 
levels for farmers. 
Water erosion is the main cause of soil erosion in Ethiopia. People left the soil 
unprotected when they removed protective plant cover by farming, burning crop 
residues, overgrazing and cutting trees (see Figure 2.14). Additional damage 
has occurred through over cultivation and by disturbing the soil, using heavy 
machines in road and building construction and mining activities. 
Grade 10 Geography 74
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
In Ethiopia, soil loss occurs at a rate of between 1.5 billion and 2 billion cubic 
meters per year. About four million hectares of highlands is now considered 
irreversibly degraded.
Types of Soil Erosion 
Soil erosion by running water are of three types: sheet, rill, and gully erosion.
i Sheet erosion occurs when the soil scattered by rain drops is removed more 
or less uniformly from every part of a slope. 
ii Rill erosion occurs when the smooth surfaces of the slope develop small 
depressions in which water concentrates and later overflows to create many 
shallow channels called rills.
iii Gully erosion develops when the water flowing along rills converges in 
channels that become enlarged, causing deep cuts in the ground. This 
process often causes considerable damage to both the topsoil and the 
subsoil. Running water, when concentrated, is able to pick up soil particles 
and move them downslope. In cases of prolonged (continuous) erosion, 
gullies (such as the one shown in Figure 2.15) are likely to form.
Figure 2.14: Soil erosion This badly degraded area in Kembata and 
Timbaro Zone in SNNPR has lost its potential for cultivation. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 75
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Stream Erosion
Rivers can form large concentrations of runoff that run downslope. Such river 
runoffs can cut the surface of the earth laterally and vertically, and transport 
eroded materials in the form of a solution full of mud downslope along their 
course (Figure 2.16). In this process, they form gorges and valleys. Ethiopian 
rivers are essential agents of erosion in the country. Soil erosion by runoff is 
serious in the highlands of Ethiopia. It occurs wherever grass, bushes, and trees 
are disappearing. Deforestation and desertification leave land more liable to 
erode.
Figure 2.15: Gully erosion This very deep gully developed because of 
the construction of the main road at Kurfa, past Nazareth (Adama), on 
the way to the town of Wolenchiti, Oromia Region. 
Figure 2.16: Stream erosion Amassa River is used as a 
border between Woliyta and Gamo zones. It carries a lot of 
mud in the form of a solution brought down from upslope 
areas of Wolyita Zone. It drains into Lake Abaya. 
Grade 10 Geography 76
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Wind erosion 
Wind erosion is the most common form of erosion in dry and treeless areas where 
the soil is exposed. The dry and unprotected topsoil from fields is blown away. 
Wind forces are capable of removing all of an area’s topsoil and transporting it 
several thousand kilometers away. 
Soil Conservation in Ethiopia
What is conservation? 
Simply the term conservation means the protection of resources from destructive 
influences. The term applies to the positive work of maintenance, enhancement and 
wise management, of resources and to restoration by reducing and reversing rates of 
damage and destruction of resources. For example, conservation efforts might reduce 
the consumption rate of a valuable resource to prevent its irreversible depletion.
Soil Conservation Measures Needed in Ethiopia
There are several measures we can institute to reduce, minimize or eliminate soil 
erosion by wind and running water. They include:
F contour ploughing – ploughing across slopes, rather than up and down 
them, to create barriers to runoff.
F terracing – installing ledges for cultivation at right angles to slopes to 
reduce runoff.
F strip cultivation – planting different crops in alternating strips to retain 
water and soil. 
F installing hedges and other windbreaks – creating borders of closely 
growing bushes, shrubs or trees beside or around areas to protect them 
from winds, predation by animals, and so forth.
F afforestation and reforestation – planting trees, for example, on bare 
land that is vulnerable to erosion. 
F avoiding cultivation – leaving land that is unsuitable for cultivation 
untilled. 
F plugging gullies – for example, with brush and wood barriers.
F limiting grazing – keep livestock according to the carrying capacity of 
the land.
F fallowing – initiating multi-year periods of non-cultivation for the land, 
allowing it to regenerate its fertility.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 77
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Here are more-detailed descriptions of some of these methods.
i Contour ploughing: It is ploughing across slopes rather than up and down 
them in order to reduce runoff. It is one of the simplest ways to prevent 
soil erosion. This soil-conservation practice is useful on gentle slopes. As 
the plough tills, it creates ridges across the slopes. They act as barriers to 
down-running water, preventing runoff from eroding the slope’s soil.
Contour ploughing can reduce soil erosion by as much as 50 percent in 
drier regions, and it increases crop yields and conserves water. 
ii Strip cultivation: It refers to the planting of different crops in alternating 
strips. Typically, the farmer alternates closely grown crops (such as wheat, 
teff, barley, and other small grains) and open-growing crops (such as corn 
and cotton). The closely grown crops minimize the flow of water, which 
reduces soil erosion and allows more water to be absorbed into the ground. 
iii Windbreaks: They are plantings of trees or other plants that protect bare 
soil from the full force of the wind (Figure 2.19 (A) and (B)). Windbreaks 
reduce the velocity of wind, and decrease the amount of soil that it can 
move away.
Figure 2.17: Contour plowing 
Tilling land at right angles on slopes 
creates a series of ridges (narrow raised 
areas) that slow runoff and prevent soil 
erosion. 
Figure 2.18: Strip cultivation
The strips are planted with alternating 
crop types.
Grade 10 Geography 78
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
iv Terracing: It involves building level surfaces at right angles to the slope to 
retain water and reduce the amount of erosion. It is an expensive method of 
controlling erosion since it requires moving of soil and stones to construct 
the level areas. This method of soil and water conservation has been 
commonly practiced by the Konso people of Ethiopia. It is also used in 
other steep-slope areas of Ethiopia. 
v Reforestation and afforestation: Reforestation is the planting of trees 
on land previously forested but from which the trees have been removed 
by natural causes or by cutting, burning or other means (Figure 2.21). 
Afforestation refers to the planting of land, not formerly so covered, with 
trees to make a forest for commercial or other purposes. 
(A) (B)
Figure 2.19: Windbreaks In large plain areas, trees provide protection from wind 
erosion. The trees along the road protect the land from oncoming winds (A). In the 
other field, temporary strips of vegetation serve as windbreaks (B).
(A) (B)
Figure 2.20: Terraces Terraces are installed at right angles to the slopes in (A). They 
are extremely important for people who live on steep slopes, especially in countries 
with little available land. They require much energy and hand labor. The type of 
terracing shown in (B) is appropriate for gentler slopes. It is more widely spaced, and it 
allows the use of farm machines.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 79
2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE 2.1 THE EARTH IN THE UNIVERSE
Focus
Soil is a renewable resource that can be replenished indefinitely by applying 
appropriate measures of conservation, although some of these measures are 
enormously expensive. Conservation is wise use of resources in the best 
possible way, so that the greatest long-term benefit is realized by society. 
Activity 2.6
Part I
Give answers to the following questions. 
1 What is soil/land degradation? 
2 What causes soil degradation? 
3 Which forces of soil erosion are most damaging in (a) the highlands and (b) the 
lowlands of Ethiopia? 
4 What are renewable and non-renewable resources? 
5 What measures of soil conservation are commonly practiced in Ethiopia?
Part II
In your group, discuss these issues. 
1 The difference between reforestation and afforestation. 
2 Which measure of soil conservation is the cheapest and most effective? 
Figure 2.21: Reforestation The photograph shows reforestation, 
planting trees on hills that were once badly denuded and devoid of trees. 
The area in this photograph is close to Negash town (which is the site of 
what is probably the first and oldest mosque in Ethiopia, Negashi, Tigray). 
Grade 10 Geography 80
2.2 CLIMATE
2.2 CLIMATE
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ Realize the criteria used for classifying climate; 
Þ Compare the climate classifications of the Greeks’ and that of Koppen; 
Þ Express causes of climate change; 
Þ Explain major consequences of climate change 
 Key Terms
³ greenhouse effect
³ greenhouse gases
³ ozone layer 
³ permafrost 
³ desertification
How does climate differ from weather? What are the elements of climate? 
What are climate controls? Why is climate classification needed? What are 
the major types of climate and climatic regions of the world? In which climatic 
region do you live?
2.2.1 Classification of the Climates of the 
World
How is climate classified? 
There are many ways to classify climate, each with its own advantages and 
disadvantages, depending on the purposes for which it is used. In the following 
sections, we consider two systems of climate classification with their climatic 
regions:
Â the system of the ancient Greeks – based on temperature and sunshine 
within latitudinal boundaries
Â the Koppen system – based on temperature and precipitation as reflected 
in vegetation zones
Classification by Ancient Greeks
Which zone is warm year - round? 
After considering worldwide temperature and sunshine distribution, the ancient 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 81
2.2 CLIMATE 2.2 CLIMATE
Greeks divided the world into three climatic regions. Note that they are bounded 
by specific latitudes: 
1 The low-latitude tropical (or torrid) zone: a winterless tropical 
region. It is bounded by the northern and southern limit of the sun's 
vertical rays (23½o
N and 23½o
S). In this climatic region, the noon 
sun is always high, day and night are of nearly equal length, and it is 
warm year-round. 
2 A middle-latitude temperate zone: sandwiched between the other two 
zones i.e., (23½o – 66½o
N), and 23½o – 66½o
S this climatic region has 
distinct summer and winter seasons and exhibits characteristics of 
both extremes, in terms of seasonal temperatures. 
3 The high-latitude polar (or frigid) zone: bounded by (1) the Arctic 
Circle, at 66½N-90o
N, and (2) the Antarctic Circle, at 66½o
S-90o
S. 
Places with this climate are considered summerless, because they are 
cold all year round due to long periods of winter darkness and a low 
summer sun. 
The ancient Greeks’ system is some what simplistic method of climatic 
classification because it does not consider precipitation, and therefore it does not 
differentiate between wet and dry regions. 
The Kðppen System of Climate Classification
What makes Koppen classification more acceptable than the others? 
This widely used classification of world climates is based on seasonal variations in 
the annual and monthly averages of temperature and precipitation. It was devised 
by the famous German scientist Waldmir Kðppen (1846 – 1940). Faced with the 
lack of adequate observing stations throughout the world, Kðppen related the 
various climates to the distributions and types of native vegetation in the world. 
In this way, where no climatological data were available, climatic boundaries 
could be approximated with vegetation zones. 
The Kðppen climate classification, is now used by climatologists throughout the 
world. It defines five principal climatic groups. Each type is designated by a 
capital letter. Note that a single climatic region can exist in multiple locations on 
the earth. A Koppen climatic region is not a spatial or areal region.
A Tropical moist climate: All months have an average temperature 
above 18ºC (64ºF). There is enough moisture to support abundant 
plant communities. Since all months are warm, there is no real winter 
season.
Grade 10 Geography 82
2.2 CLIMATE
B Dry climates: precipitation is deficient most of the year. Potential 
evaporation and transpiration exceeds precipitation.
C Moist mid-latitude climates with mild winters: C climates have 
warm-to-hot summers with mild winters. The average temperature of 
the coldest month is below 18o
C (64o
F) and above -3o
C (27o
F).
D Moist mid-latitude climates with severe winters: D climates are 
similar to C climates, but have distinct summer and winter seasons. 
They have enough moisture to support abundant plant communities. 
The average temperature of the warmest month exceeds 10o
C (50o
F), 
and the coldest month average drops below -3o
C (27o
F). 
E Polar climates: They have extremely cold winters and summers. The 
average temperature of the warmest month is below 10o
C (50o
F). 
Winters are extremely cold, and even the summers are cool. Since all 
months are cold, there is no real summer season.
H Highland climate: At low latitudes the effect of altitude can produce 
tundra and polar conditions. Glaciers on tropical mountain sum its 
attest to the cooling effects of altitude highland climates follow the 
pattern of Earth’s mountain ranges. 
Figure 2.22: General climate classfication 
Cs
Cfa
Af
Aw
BS
BWh
Aw Af
Cfa
Dfa, b
BS
BS
Cfc
Cfb
Cs
Dfc
ET
Af
Cfb BWk
BWh
Cs
Bs
Aw
Bs
BWh
Cfc
Cfb Dfb
BWk BWk
Am
Aw
Am Aw
Cs Bs
BWh Cfa
Aw
Cfb
Af
Dfc Dwd
Dwb
Dfb
Cfa
Cwa
Et
BS
Al
Aw
Af
Cfc
H
E
D
C
B
A
Af Cs
Am Cfa
Cfb, c
Dfa, b
Dfc
Aw
BW
BS
Monsoon: heavy summer rains
Seasonal summer rains
Arid: h-hot: k-cool
Semi-arid (steepe)
Mediterranean: wet winters
Rain all year, hot summers Cw: dry winters EF
ET Arctic (tundra)
Ice sheet
Highlands
Dw: dry winters
Rain all year, b-warmer summers; c-cool summers
Cold winters: a-hot summers; b-warm summers
Cold winters: c-cool summers; b-extreme winter cold
Equatorial: rainy all year
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 83
2.2 CLIMATE 2.2 CLIMATE
Activity 2.7
 
 
1 Study the monthly temperatures of City 1 and City 2. 
2 Compare and contrast. Next study the seasonal patterns, in each city, for each 
of the two climate elements – temperature and precipitation. Then perform the 
following activities and answer the following questions:
a Describe the pattern of rainfall and temperature distribution for each city. 
b Which city has the warmest climate? 
c Which city has the driest climate? 
d Which city is probably situated in a desert? 
e Which city is probably located in a tropical zone? 
f Which city has uniform annual precipitation distribution? 
Part 2
With your teacher, visit the meteorological station found nearest to your school. Ask 
the experts there to give you the most recent available 12 months of data for your 
locality’s monthly temperature and precipitation.
3 When you return to your classroom, use the data to perform these activities,
4 Draw two graphs, similar to those in Figure 2.24, that show seasonal distributions of 
a temperature b rainfall; 
5 Identify 
a the warmest three months
b the coldest three months 
c the driest three months 
d the wettest three months
Part 3
Work with your group to choose a group representative to present your ideas 
to the class.
Figure 2.23: Seasonal patterns of temperature and precipitation 
for meteorological stations in two different cities
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
Temperature (oC) 
Temperature o
C
Month Month Precipitation (mm) 
Precipitation (mm) 
City 1 City 2
Grade 10 Geography 84
2.2 CLIMATE
2.2.2 Climate Change
What is climate change? Is climate change a reality? What are some of the 
manifestations and consequences of climate change? 
Climate change is a long-term change in the statistical distribution of weather 
patterns over periods of time that range from decades to millions of years. It may 
be a change in the average weather conditions or a change in the distribution of 
weather events with respect to an average, for example, greater or fewer extreme 
weather events. Climate change may be limited to a specific region, or may occur 
across the whole Earth. 
Causes of Climate Change
What causes climate change? 
The earth’s climate is dynamic. It is always changing through a natural cycle. 
What the world is more worried about is that the changes that are occurring 
today have been speeded up because of man’s activities. These changes are being 
studied by scientists all over the world and tried to identify the causes. The causes 
of climate change can be divided into two categories - those that are due to natural 
causes and those that are caused by human factors. 
A Natural causes 
There are a number of natural factors responsible for climate change. Some of the 
more prominent ones are continental drift, volcanoes, ocean currents etc. Let’s 
look at them in a little detail.
Continental drift 
The continents that we are familiar with today were formed when the landmass 
began gradually drifting apart, millions of years back. This drift also had an 
impact on the climate because it changed the physical features of the landmass, 
their position and the position of water bodies. The separation of the landmasses 
changed the flow of ocean currents and winds, which affected the climate. This 
drift of the continents continues even today; the Himalayan range is rising by 
about 1 mm (millimeter) every year because the Indian land mass is moving 
towards the Asian land mass, slowly but steadily. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 85
2.2 CLIMATE 2.2 CLIMATE
Volcanoes 
When a volcano erupts it throws out large volumes of sulphur dioxide (SO2
), water 
vapour, dust, and ash into the atmosphere. Although the volcanic activity may last 
only a few days, the large volumes of gases and ash can influence climatic patterns 
for years. Millions of tones of sulphur dioxide gas can reach the upper levels of 
the atmosphere (called the stratosphere) from a major eruption. The gases and dust 
particles partially block the incoming rays of the sun, leading to cooling. 
Ocean currents
What causes ocean currents? 
The oceans are a major component of the climate system. Ocean currents 
move vast amounts of heat across the planet - roughly the same amount as the 
atmosphere does. But the oceans are surrounded by land masses, so heat transport 
through the water is in channels. 
Ocean currents have known to change direction or slow down. Much of the heat 
that escapes from the oceans is in the form of water vapour, the most abundant 
greenhouse gas on earth. Yet, water vapour also contributes to the formation of 
clouds, which shade the surface and have a net cooling effect. 
B Human Causes 
How do human activities affect climate? 
The industrial revolution in the 19th century saw the large - scale use of fossil 
fuels for industrial activities. These industries created jobs and over the years, 
people moved from rural areas to the cities. This trend is continuing even today. 
More and more land that was covered with vegetation has been cleared to make 
way for houses. Natural resources are being used extensively for construction, 
industries, transport, and consumption. Consumerism (our increasing want 
for material things) has increased by leaps and bounds, creating mountains of 
waste. Also, population growth has increased to an incredible extent. All this has 
contributed to a rise in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Greenhouse gases and their sources 
What are the sources of green house gases? 
Carbon dioxide is undoubtedly, the most important greenhouse gas in the 
atmosphere. Changes in land use pattern, deforestation, land clearing, agriculture, 
and other activities have all led to a rise in the emission of carbon dioxide. 
Grade 10 Geography 86
2.2 CLIMATE
Methane is another important greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. About 1/4 of all 
methane emissions are said to come from domesticated animals. These animals 
produce methane during the cud - chewing process. Methane is also released 
from rice or paddy fields that are flooded during the sowing and maturing periods. 
A large amount of nitrous oxide emission has been attributed to fertilizer 
application. 
Greenhouse effect 
What aggravates green house effect? 
The greenhouse effect is a process by which thermal radiation from a planetary 
surface is absorbed by atmospheric greenhouse gases, and is re-radiated in all 
directions. Since part of this re-radiation is back towards the surface, energy is 
transferred to the surface and the lower atmosphere. As a result, the temperature 
there is higher than it would be if direct heating by solar radiation were the only 
warming mechanism. 
This mechanism is fundamentally different from that of an actual greenhouse, 
which works by isolating warm air inside the structure so that heat is not lost by 
convection. 
Global warming, a recent warming of the earth’s surface and lower atmosphere, 
is believed to be the result of a strengthening of the greenhouse effect mostly 
due to human - produced increases in concentration of atmospheric greenhouse 
gases, CO2
 in particular. 
Since the beginning of the industrial revolution, the burning of fossil fuels has 
increased the levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere from 280 ppm to 390 ppm 
(parts per million). The emissions of carbon are directly proportional to energy 
consumption. 
Figure 2.24: The greenhouse 
effect The moment you step 
into a greenhouse, you feel 
the greenhouse effect. Heat 
trapped by the glass walls 
warms the air inside. Similarly, 
atmospheric greenhouse 
gases, particularly CO2
, trap 
heat close to Earth’s surface.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 87
2.2 CLIMATE 2.2 CLIMATE
Consequences of climate change 
What are the possible consequences of climate change resulting from global 
warming? 
Global warming 
Global warming is the increase in the average temperature of earth’s near - 
surface air and oceans since the mid - 20th century and its projected continuation. 
According to the 2007 fourth assessment report by the Intergovernmetnal Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC), global surface temperature increased by about 0.74 ± 
0.18o
C (1.33 ± 0.32o
F) during the 20th century. Most of the observed temperature 
increase since the middle of the 20th century has been caused by increasing 
concentrations of greenhouse gases, which result to human activity such as the 
burning of fossil fuel and deforestation. Global dimming, a result of increasing 
concentrations of atmospheric aerosols that block sunlight from reaching the 
surface, has partially countered the effects of warming induced by greenhouse 
gases. 
Desertification 
Desert - like condition’s may spread over human habitats, crop lands and wet 
lands. Grass land and forest areas might turn into desertified environments as a 
result of global warming and hence climate change. 
Drought 
Because of climate change which results in extensive damage to plants, crops and 
animals, droughts are likely to occur more frequently. Up to three billion people 
could suffer from increased water shortages by 2080. In Ethiopia, for example, 
1860
- 0.8
- 0.4
 0.0
 0.4
 0.8
1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
GLOBAL
Year
1920 1940
Temperature change (oC)
- 0.4
 0.0
 0.4
Figure 2.25: Average global 
temperature variations 
from 1860 through 2000 
The zero line represents the 
average surface temperature 
from 1961 to 1990 (Source: 
P. D. Jones, et al., and Climate 
Change 2001: the Scientific Basis, 
2001, by J.T. Houghton, et al.)
Grade 10 Geography 88
2.2 CLIMATE
drought started to reoccur more frequently, at an interval of 3 to 8 years in the 
most drought prone regions. 
A rise in the sea - level 
Globally, the average sea - level could rise by 18 to 59 cm, or more, by the end of 
the century. Rising sea levels could swamp some small, low - lying island states 
and put millions of people living in low - lying areas at greater risk of flooding. 
It is also possible that salt from rising sea levels may contaminate underground 
fresh water supplies in coastal areas. The sea expected to encroach coastal areas 
and cover land surfaces. 
Shift of the direction of global winds 
If the average global temperature increases the jet stream will weaken and 
global winds will shift from their “normal’ position. This in turn may disturb the 
“normal” amount of seasonal pattern and distribution of precipitation. 
Shift of Tropical Zone
The tropical zone expected to extend north and southwards by not less than one 
degree in the northern and southern hemisphere respectively. 
Expansion of Tropical Diseases
It is widely recognized that zone of mosquitos breeding and hence malaria spread 
farther into upper grounds, lower Woina Dega agroclimatic zones in case of 
Ethiopia. 
Loss of Biodiversity 
A global temperature rise could make some species extinct. There are already 
changes to the way plants and animals live. 
Further changes in rainfall and temperature will affect many animal and plant 
species around the world. Some species might be unable to adapt quickly enough 
and habitats might not be available for them to move into. If global temperatures 
rise by two degrees celsius, 30 percent of all land-living species could be 
threatened by an increased risk of extinction. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 89
2.2 CLIMATE 2.2 CLIMATE
 Focus
The atmospheric greenhouse effect blocks the escape of some radiation to 
upper space. Therefore it heats the earth’s atmosphere and surface. This 
process is due to the presence of blanketing “greenhouse gases” such as 
CO2
, CH4
, N2
O, CFC, and water vapor in the atmosphere. Their presence 
acts as a barrier to radiation and heat that would normally escape through 
the atmosphere. The atmosphere warms as it absorbs and then emits 
infrared radiation downwards, while allowing shortwave radiation to pass 
out, away from the earth. The most noticeable result of the greenhouse 
effect is global warming, which is characterized by global temperature 
rises ranging between 0.5o
C and 0.6o
C.
Activity 2.8
In your geography work group, perform the following activities. 
1 Discuss climate change: what it is and how it differs from climate variability. List 
some of its most noticeable effects.
2 What changes do you observe in your locality in relation to climate change? 
Do you think any of Ethiopia’s endangered plant and animal species still exist 
in your wereda and region? Have patterns of temperature and rainfall changed 
during your lifetime or that of your parents or of the elders in your family? 
Ask your parents and elderly relatives about temperature and rainfall changes 
in your locality? Have such changes been significant within their lifetimes? 
Within your lifetime, so far? Have such changes affected any of your lives? If so, 
how?
3 Consider any other changes in your locality that you think have resulted from 
climate change.
Create a report of all of your findings and opinions in your science journal.
4 Have you heard about any rivers, lakes or swampy areas in your locality that 
have shrunk in volume or even disappeared due to climate change? If so, write 
about it and report your ideas in class.
Grade 10 Geography 90
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
5 Travel, either with the group or alone, to nearby rural area and talk with the 
peasants about climate change. Have they encountered the term climate 
change? Are they aware of climate changes in their area? If so, what are the 
changes, and how have they affected their work and earning capacity? For 
example, have climate changes led them to change their farming activities, and 
have those changes affected their ability to earn a living? 
6 Work with your group to prepare a report on your activities findings and 
opinions that you developed during in Tasks 1–5 of this Activity. Then work 
together to choose a group representative to present the report to the class.
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ describe the spatio-temporal variation of temperature in Ethiopia;
Þ compare rainfall distribution of Ethiopia by place and time; 
Þ discuss factors why Ethiopia experiences climate different from other 
tropical countries; 
Þ differentiate climate zones of Ethiopia; 
Þ explain the reasons that drought may not necessarily followed by famine; 
Þ identify drought prone areas of Ethiopia; 
Þ state drought coping mechanism in agriculture.
Key Terms
³ altitude 
³ traditional climate zone
³ insolation 
³ Inter tropical convergence zone
³ drought prone areas 
³ drought
³ desertification
³ rainfall regime
³ range 
2.3.1 Distribution of Major Elements of 
Climate in Ethiopia 
What are the two most important elements of climate? Is the distribution of 
rainfall and temperature uniform in Ethiopia?
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 91
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
Temperature Distribution 
Temperature in Ethiopia is determined primarily by altitude and latitude. Ethiopia 
lies within the tropics, a zone of maximum insolation, where every place has 
overhead sun twice a year. However, considerable portions of Ethiopia are 
highland areas, and their altitudes give them non-tropical temperatures. Ethiopia’s 
tropical climate occur in lowlands at the country’s peripheries. 
Away from the peripheral lowlands, the land begins to rise gradually and 
considerably, culminating in peaks in various parts of the country. The highlands 
form the heartland of the country. Thus temperature in most of the center of 
the country is affected by altitude, and temperature essentially decreases from 
Ethiopia’s peripheries towards the interior. Ethiopia experiences both hot and 
cold extremes of temperature (see Figure 2.26).
Daily Temperatures: Ethiopia’s daily temperatures are more extreme than its 
annual averages. In terms of spatial distribution, Ethiopia’s daily maximum 
temperature varies from a high of more than 37o
C over the lowlands of the 
northeast and of the southeast to a low of about 10o
C-15o
C over the highlands of 
Ethiopia. In terms of temporal distribution, the months of March, April and May 
are generally the hottest throughout the country.
Monthly Temperatures: Ethiopia’s monthly temperatures also exhibit extremes. 
The lowest monthly minimum temperatures mostly occur over the highlands 
of the country. Most of the highlands experience mean minimum temperatures 
as low as 0ºC between November and January (Bega season). The highest 
mean monthly minimum temperature (20ºC - 30ºC) is observed in the Dallol 
Depression. The lowest mean monthly minimum temperature (0ºC or less) occurs 
in January in the highlands in the northwest (Gonder and Gojam), central (Shewa) 
and southeast (Arsi-Bale), and the highest (30ºC) occurs in the lowlands of the 
western, southeastern and northeastern areas.
Annual temperatures: Mean annual temperature varies from a low of about 10o
C, 
in the northwest, central and southeast highlands, to a high of about 35o
C at the 
country’s northeastern edges, which contain the Dallol (Denakil) Depression. As 
you can again infer, altitude is the most important temperature-controlling factor 
in Ethiopia.
Grade 10 Geography 92
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
Source: EMA, 1988.
Temperature Ranges 
Daily (diurnal) temperature range: In the northern hemisphere, during the 
winter months of December, January and February, the sun apparently shifts to 
the southern hemisphere and Ethiopia experiences its bega season. During this 
period, the sky is clear, without blanketing cloud cover to retain heat or cold on 
earth. Therefore, during the day the heat from the sun is intense. But at night, 
because of the clear sky and relatively longer nights, temperature drops very 
low. Reflecting such clear-sky conditions, Ethiopia’s daily temperature range is 
greatest during bega in most parts of the country. 
Annual temperature range: Ethiopia’s annual temperature range is the highest in 
the lowlands, and it decreases with increasing altitude. 
Distribution of Rainfall
Which part of Ethiopia is the driest and wettest? 
Overall, mean annual rainfall ranges from over 2200 mm in pockets of areas in the 
southwestern high lands to less than 400 mm over the northeast and southeastern 
lowlands of the country (Figure 2.27). However, the low end of the range is 
much less in the southeast lowlands, the Ogaden area, standing at 200 mm. In the 
northeast lowlands, the Afar region, it is even less than 100 mm.
ADDIS ABABA
More than 300
C
250
C - 29.90
C
200
C - 24.90
C
150
C - 19.90
C
100
C - 14.90
C
Less than 100
C
Legend
Figure 2.26: Mean annual temperature distribution Ethiopia
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 93
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
The map shows that southwestern Ethiopia is the region of heaviest rainfall. It is 
the wettest part of the country, with only two to four dry months in a year. The 
mean annual rainfall for southwestern Ethiopia is about 1500 mm, but in some 
areas it is much higher – reaching up to 2800 mm in Mocha, southwestern parts 
of Gore and Arjo. Also well over the national average, mean annual rainfall can 
exceed 2000 mm in parts of Gimira and Kafa, Limu, Gore, Buno Bedele, Sore 
and Geba and the southern extreme of Gimbi. The adjoining western lowlands of 
Gambella and Assossa and Benishangul, which are found on the windward sides 
of the western highlands, receive over 1000 mm of annual rainfall. 
From the southwest, mean annual rainfall gradually decreases towards the 
northeast and east. In central and north-central Ethiopia, the annual amount is 
moderate, about 1100 mm. But, there are some pockets where annual rainfall 
reaches over 2000 mm. These include the western parts of Awi zone, and parts of 
Metekel and Kola Dega Damot. In parts of northern Gonder and central Wegera 
and central Semien, the mean annual exceeds 1600 mm.
In southeastern Ethiopia, the mean annual rainfall is about 700 mm. However, 
this amount varies from over 2000 mm in Jemjem, and over 1200 mm in parts 
of Genale and Dolo in the Bale zone and parts of Webera in Harerge, to less than 
400 mm in most of the Ogaden area. In northern Ethiopia, including Tigray and 
Wollo, the mean annual rainfall is about 500 mm, but in some areas it rises to 
over 1200 mm.
MEAN ANNUAL RAINFALL
More than 2400 mm
2000 2399
1600 - 1999
1200 - 1599
600 - 1199
400 - 799
Less than 400
More than 2400 mm
2000 2399
1600 - 1999
1200 - 1599
600 - 1199
Figure 2.27: Mean annual rainfall distribution in Ethiopia (Adapted 
from the National Atlas of Ethiopia, EMA, 1988)
Grade 10 Geography 94
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
Seasonal Pattern of Rainfall 
Which part of Ethiopia is all - year rainfall region? 
Summer Rainfall
As the ITCZ (Inter - Tropiacal convergence zone, zone of convergence of north 
east and south east trade winds) drifts towards the north in northern hemisphere 
summer (Keremt), the equatorial westerly winds from the South Atlantic Ocean 
invade most parts of Ethiopia, while the trade winds from the north retreat from 
the country. The ITCZ’s southward drift marks the onset of the trade winds from 
the north, which causes the retreat of the equatorial monsoons. Such periodical 
shifts in the flow pattern of winds causes rainfall to be variable and seasonal in 
Ethiopia. 
Rainfall in Ethiopia is seasonal, varying in amount over space and time. There 
is the long and heavy summer rain, which is normally referred to as “the big 
rain” or keremt. There are also short and moderate rains in autumn (Tebi), winter 
(Bega) and spring (Belg). They are collectively called “the little rains”. 
In contrast to the rest of Ethiopia, southwestern Ethiopia gets rain for a long 
period that stretches usually for more than eight to ten months. 
Other regions, for instance the southeastern lowlands, receive rain twice a year. 
These rainy seasons do not correspond with keremt or bega. 
In most of highland Ethiopia, the main rainy season is in summer (June to 
September), when the ITCZ is to the north of Ethiopia. During this season, the 
whole country with the exception of a few places is under the influence of the 
southwest equatorial westerly winds from the South Atlantic Ocean or of the 
south easterly winds from the Indian Ocean. 
Effects of the southwest equatorial westerly winds: The southwest equatorial 
westerly winds originate from the South Atlantic Ocean, and they blow over 
the humid regions of the Gulf of Guinea, the Congo basin and Central Africa 
on their way to Ethiopia. When these winds approach Ethiopia they encounter 
highlands. When they start ascending over the highlands, they cause heavy rain in 
southwestern Ethiopia because they are moisture - laden. However, the amount 
of rainfall gradually decreases as the winds move north and northeastwards. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 95
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
Highland Ethiopia receives the widest coverage of these keremt rains, though the 
amount that falls in different areas varies. The southwest experiences the longest 
Keremt rain. Keremt lasts for only two to three months in the extreme northeast 
highlands.
The eastern escarpments of the northeastern highlands and associated lowlands 
(the Afar region) remain dry, because they are in what is called a rain shadow. 
Effects of the southeasterly winds: The southeasterly winds that originate from 
the Indian Ocean blow over Ethiopia’s southeastern highlands and associated 
lowlands. However, these winds lose their moisture over the East African 
highlands before they reach Ethiopia. Therefore, the country’s southeastern 
highlands and associated lowlands that receive the winds remain relatively dry. 
Winter Rainfall
In winter the ITCZ shifts farthest south. Most of Ethiopia comes under the 
influence of North East Trade winds, which originate from west Asian high 
pressure centers. 
These winds are cold and dry, and they carry little or no moisture, giving most 
of the country a dry winter. Only the Red Sea coastal plains, including parts of 
the Afar region, receive rain. This rain is little in amount, and is due to the area’s 
proximity to the Red Sea. 
Another exception to this lack of rain is southwestern Ethiopia. In winter this 
region is still under the influence of the equatorial westerly winds, although they 
are now weak. The moderate rain they supply to the region at this time is the 
area’s smallest annual amount. 
Spring and Autumn Rainfall
In spring the ITCZ drifts to the north and lies across Ethiopia. At this time, a 
strong low-pressure cell develops over the Sudan. This center attracts. 
F Winds from the Gulf of Aden F Indian Ocean highs 
These moist south easterly winds blow across central and southern Ethiopia, and 
they produce the big rains in southeastern Ethiopia. 
The same winds produce the little rain of spring for the east central part of the 
northwestern highlands. These rains are often called Belg rain. 
Grade 10 Geography 96
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
Spring is the major rainfall season in the southeastern highlands and associated 
lowlands (Ogaden, Borena of Oromia and the South Omo zone). The area’s 
second rainfall season is in autumn. 
In the southeast peripheral lowlands, the towns of Moyale and Kelafo also receive 
their rainfall in spring and autumn. Moyale’s annual rain is about 1000 mm. 
Kelafo’s is about 500 mm. For Moyale, about 50% occurs in spring, and about 
37% occurs in autumn. For Kelafo, the percentage distribution are approximately 
60% and 33% respectively.
2.3.2 Major Climate Controls in Ethiopia
Which geographical factor is more important to the climate of Ethiopia? 
Many physical factors influence Ethiopia’s climates and their distribution. They 
are collectively called controls of climate. 
Ethiopia’s most important climate controls are
F latitude F altitude F cloud cover 
The above noted factors, together with other less important ones, determine the 
distribution of climate in Ethiopia. As noted earlier, Ethiopia is located within the 
Tropics. Therefore, in principle, it is a tropical country and might be expected to 
High 2231 
Low 95 
YEAR ROUND RAINS 
(except Dec-Feb)
SPRING AND 
SUMMER RAIN
SUMMER RAINS
SPRING AND FALL RAIN
Annual rainfallw (mm)
Figure 2.28: Rainfall Regimes and Climates of Ethiopia 
(Adapted from the National Atlas of Ethiopia, EMA, 1988)
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 97
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
have tropical climate throughout. However, since Ethiopia is a highland country, 
much of its climate is affected by altitude. It is only in lowland areas that a 
tropical climate (Kolla) prevails. Altitude is the most important climate control in 
the highland parts of the country. For instance, rainfall amount tends to increase 
with altitude, while, in contrast temperature decreases with increasing elevation. 
Next to altitude in importance is latitude. See Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Relationships between temperature, latitude and altitude
Town Latitude Altitude (m) Mean annual 
temperature (oC)
Addis Ababa 9o 2400 17
Awash 9o 916 25
Ambo 9o 2130 18
Nekemte 9o 2005 18.3
Dire Dawa 9.6o 1160 25
In Ethiopia’s highlands, cloud cover is another important climate control during 
the long rainy season – June to September. Although this period has high sun, 
comparatively low temperatures prevail due to the season’s cloud cover, which 
absorbs and reflects away much of the incoming rays of the sun. The other 
period of high sun in Ethiopia is March to May. In the highlands, this season is 
not characterized by cloud cover and its temperatures are relatively high. The 
northeast and southeast lowlands have both low altitude and clear skies, and 
therefore their temperature is high. 
Focus
Climate controls are factors that act on climate elements and produce 
different climate types. On a global level, important climate controls 
include latitude, altitude, distance from the sea, ocean currents, wind and 
air pressure, major and local relief, and sky conditions. In the Ethiopian 
context, altitude and latitude are the most important determinants of 
climate. Although two places might lie on nearly the same latitude, if their 
altitudes vary, they probably have large temperature differences. 
Grade 10 Geography 98
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
Activity 2.9
Give short answers:
1 Identify the absolute location of Ethiopia. 
2 What are the two water bodies that separate northeast Africa from Asia? 
3 Which landform divides the Ethiopian highlands in to two? 
4 What sort of climate would Ethiopia have if it had no highlands?
5 Is the climate of Ethiopia uniform throughout the country? Is the climate of 
Ethiopia shaped more by its latitudinal location or its variation in relief?
6 Which season is the warmest, coldest, wettest and driest in your area? Are there 
relationships between the major wind systems and the distribution of rainfall 
in Ethiopia?
2.3.3 Main Seasons and Climatic Zones of 
Ethiopia
Main Seasons of Ethiopia
Which season is the driest in most part of Ethiopia? In which season flowers 
blossom?
Ethiopia is a tropical country. It is located completely within the tropical zone. 
Because of its tropical location there is little variation in the length of days and 
nights. The maximum difference, about 30 minutes, occurs in December and 
June. Many people of the country are not aware of the differences. There are four 
main seasons per year: Keremt, Tseday, Bega and Belg (Table 2.2). 
Table 2.2: Temporal distribution of the main seasons in Ethiopia
Months*
Name of season
Location of the sun
English Amharic
June, July and August Summer Keremt Northern hemisphere
September, October and 
November Autumn Tseday Around the equator
December, January and 
February Winter Bega Southern hemisphere
March, April and May Spring Belg Around the equator
* The months noted correspond only roughly to the traditional seasons.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 99
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
Traditional Climatic Zones of Ethiopia 
The traditional Ethiopian classification of climatic zones is based on altitude and 
temperature. This system divides the nation into the following five major climatic 
zones: Bereha, Kolla, Woina Dega, Dega and Wurch.
Bereha: Bereha is the hot arid climate. Bereha is the climate of the desert 
lowlands that are found below 500 m above mean sea level where the average 
annual rainfall is less than 400 mm, and average annual temperature is over 30o
C. 
Bereha is usually characterized by strong wind, high temperature, low relative 
humidity, and little cloud cover. Evapotranspiration is always in excess of rainfall 
in some places. 
Kolla: Kolla is a (warm-to-hot semi-arid climate). Kolla is the climate of the 
hot lowlands with an altitudinal range of 500 to 1500 m a.s.l. Average annual 
temperatures are between 20o
C and 30o
C. Although mean annual rainfall ranges 
between 410 mm and 820 mm, it can be as high as 1600 mm in the wet western 
lowlands of Gambella. Rainfall is highly variable from year to year. 
This region is intermediate between the hot arid climate and the humid climates.
Woina Dega: This is subtropical warm-to-cool semi-humid zone which 
corresponds to roughly with what is commonly known as the warm temperate 
climate. Woina Dega has distinct dry and wet months in winter and summer 
respectively. 
The average annual temperature is between 15ºC and 20ºC, and annual rainfall is 
generally around 1200 mm. 
Woina Dega covers the temperate highlands that fall with altitudes between 
1500 m and 2300 m amsl. In the southwest, rainfall reaches 2400 mm. 
Dega: Dega corresponds roughly with the temperate climate. Dega is the climate 
of the cool temperate highlands. It covers a region with an altitude range of 
2300 m to 3300 m amsl. The coldest month is less than 10o
C. The area experiences 
adequate rainfall. Rainfall ranges from about 1000 mm, in most areas, to 2000 
mm in higher altitudes. 
Wurch: Wurch is a type of Alpine climate. The annual average temperature is 
less than 10ºC. Annual rainfall is between 800 and 2000 mm. The zone exists at 
altitudes equal to or more than 3300 m amsl. 
Grade 10 Geography 100
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
This zone exists as afro-alpine areas on the highest areas of Ethiopia’s plateaus. 
It is found in small isolated high areas such as the Senate plateaus (Bale zone), 
Semen mountains (north Gonder), Mount Guna (south Gonder), Amara Saint 
(south Wollo), and the Choke mountains (Gojam). 
Table 2.3: Traditional Temperature and Altitude Zones in Ethiopia 
Traditional 
Zones
Global Altitude (meters) 
Zones
Mean Annual 
Temperature (OC) 
Wurch Alpine Above 3300 Below 10o
C
Dega Temperate 2300 - 3300 10o
C - 15o
C 
Woina Dega Sub - Tropical 1500 - 2300 15o
C - 20o
C 
Kolla Tropical 500 - 1500 20o
C - 30o
C 
Bereha Desert Below 500 >30o
C 
Source: Atlas for secondary schools of Ethiopia
Activity 2.10
I Answer the followings.
1 What are the main traditional classification of seasons in Ethiopia? What are 
their corresponding names in your mother-tongue language?
2 Which traditional Ethiopian seasons correspond with summer, autumn, winter 
and spring?
3 Are there any cultural differences between the Kolla and Dega people? Do they 
cultivate the same crops, rear the same domestic animals, use the same staples 
and wear similar clothes?
4 Do you think Dega and Kolla crops ripen at the same time? Why do the Dega 
people send their cattle to Kolla for grazing during rainy seasons?
II Using the following 2008 temperature and rainfall data for Addis Ababa 
(Table 2.4), perform these tasks:
5 Determine the city mean monthly maximum and minimum temperatures. 
6 Calculate the 2008 annual mean temperature.
7 Identify the three warmest and coldest months of that year. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 101
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
8 Regarding temperature range, identify
a the month with the greatest range
b the city’s annual range
9 Identify the city’s total annual rainfall.
10 Identify the three driest and wettest months.
Table 2.4: Temperature and rainfall data of Addis Ababa, 2008
Unit J F M A M J J A S O N D
Max. temp o
C 23.3 24.1 26.6 25.2 25.8 25.5 21.3 21.3 22.9 23.0 23.9 22.2
Min. temp o
C 9 10 11.9 12.0 12.1 12.3 11.5 11.6 11.9 10.5 8.7 10.7
Rainfall mm 21.3 2.73 28.4 80.6 58.9 82.6 349.9 388.3 112.9 45.8 4.4 0
2.3.4 Drought in Ethiopia
What is drought? What is famine? Does drought necessarily lead to famine? 
What are the causes of drought? What are some of the consequences of 
drought? What is the average recurrence interval of major and minor drought 
in Ethiopia? Which part of Ethiopia is the most affected by recurring drought? 
What are some drought-mitigation and drought-adaptation measures? What is 
drought? 
Drought is a condition that happens when much less rain is received than is 
normally expected. It is a period of abnormally dry weather that is sufficiently 
long enough to cause serious problems for agriculture and other activities in 
the affected area. This extended period usually involves months or years during 
which the region receives consistently below-average rainfall. 
Drought is one of the world’s major environmental hazards. It affects human and 
animal life catastrophically, and it can cause severe crop failure.
Consequences of drought
Unless drought-causing conditions are reversed by putting into practice measures 
of mitigation, drought can have adverse consequences both on the natural 
environment and on the socio-economic life of the people in drought-prone areas. 
Some of the general consequences include climate change, drying up of surface 
and subsurface water sources (ponds, streams, swamps, reservoirs, lakes, etc.), 
Grade 10 Geography 102
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
decline in underground water tables, loss of soil moisture, crop failure, starvation 
and famine, death of animals and human beings, lack of seeds, livestock and 
labor, loss of biodiversity and environmental deterioration, desertification, rural 
out-migration, etc.
Although famine and starvation can result from drought, they are not its necessary 
consequences, even though this has generally been the case in Ethiopia and other 
less developed countries. 
Drought can happen anywhere in the world. But a countries’ ability to resist it is a 
function of their developmental stage. Less developed countries like Ethiopia are 
highly vulnerable, and affected by post-drought effects. In addition, their political, 
economic and social affairs are highly influenced by drought and its product, 
famine. However, economical well-to-do countries can manage drought and resist 
its after effects with their systems and wealth. A country under the influences of 
drought and famine for long periods of time may develop dependency syndrome. 
This may lead to loss of self esteem and national pride and end up in longing for 
foreign donations.
Drought-Prone Areas in Ethiopia 
The three drought-probability zones of Ethiopia include:
i High drought probability zone (zone III) covered about 25% of Ethiopia in 
1988. This zone includes the Bereha climatic zones of the largest part of the 
Somali and Afar regions, part of the Tigray region, the eastern portion of 
the Amhara region, and the southern part of the Oromia region.
ii Medium drought probability zone (Zone II) covers part of the Somali, 
Oromia and Afar regions, and small portions of the eastern Tigray and 
Amhara regions. It covers about 10% of the country. 
iii Low drought probability zone (Zone I) also covers about 16% of Ethiopia’s 
area, including most of the semi-arid (Kolla) climatic zones. It includes 
part of the eastern highlands of Tigray and Amhara regions, the eastern and 
southern parts of Harerge, a portion of the Bale, Borena and Guji zones, 
and the southern portion of the south Omo zone. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 103
2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 2.3 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA 
Drought-Coping Mechanisms in Ethiopia
What should be done to mitigate and cope with drought and its adverse effects?
Geographers expect major droughts to reoccur in Ethiopia at about ten-year 
intervals and expect minor droughts at two-years intervals. Hence, the Federal 
and Regional Governments, the nation’s farming community and other stake 
holders, should make themselves ready for the challenge of reoccurring drought 
and related problems by mobilizing the resources of rural farming and pastoralist 
communities and government facilities to avert the situation by implementing as 
many of these mitigation and adaptation measures as possible. 
F carefully planned land use to increase agricultural productivity and 
minimize erosion 
F encouraging farmers in the drier areas to plant crops that have low 
water-dependencies
F drilling deep water wells, installing water pumps and building simple 
irrigation channels.
F rainwater harvesting collecting and storing rainwater on various scales
F recycling waste water for reuse after treatment and purifying
F building reservoirs and canals and redirecting rivers as massive 
attempts at irrigation in drought-prone areas
F instituting outdoor water-use restriction - regulating the water use of 
sprinklers or buckets for watering outdoor plants, for filling pools, and 
for water-intensive home maintenance tasks
DROUGHT PRONE ZONES
Not affected by drought
Zone I
Zone II
Zone III
Figure 2.29: Drought-prone zones 
in Ethiopia (Adapted from EMA, 
1988. Internal boundary lines shown are 
no more in use.)
Grade 10 Geography 104
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
F planting trees in degraded areas
F ensuring wise use of forest rangeland resources
F maintaining reserves of food (for example, grains) and other facilities 
F limiting household size by regulating population growth
F instituting water and soil conservation programs. 
F Other measures include resettlement and rehabilitation of drought 
victims, the distribution of seeds, oxen, fertilizers and livestock in 
pastoralist regions, and construction of roads.
Activity 2.11
1 Why and how might famine affect “the national pride” of a country? 
2 Identify the regions which have been most susceptible to frequently reoccurring 
drought and famine in Ethiopia. 
3 Why are most of the western highlands and associated lowlands of the 
southwest not much prone to drought? 
4 Which areas in Ethiopia are in a transitional zone or moderate droughtprobability zone? 
5 Identify the natural and human factors that result in drought. 
6 What are the effects of drought on water resources? 
7 What measures do you suggest to combat drought in your locality? 
8 What measures are taken by people to fight drought in your local area? 
9 What measure is the government taking in your locality to fight drought and 
famine? 
10 Do you think we can solve the problem of famine with international aid only? 
Discuss.
11 What is the difference between aid and development aid? 
12 Which one is important for the future of the country? Discuss this issue in your 
group.
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ review the concept of an ecosystem; 
Þ discuss how climate affects the distribution of an ecosystem; 
Þ realize the effect of latitude on the variation of an ecosystem; 
Þ explain the role of altitude on the distribution of ecosystem; 
Þ relate factors that affect the diversity of fauna and flora in the ecosystem;
Þ identify factors that affect soil in ecosystems.
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 105
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS 2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
Key Terms
³ ecology 
³ ecosystem 
³ abiotic factor 
³ biotic factor 
³ habitat 
³ fauna 
³ flora 
³ deciduous 
³ savanna 
³ biome
Do you remember the discussion about ecosystem in grade 9? What is an 
ecosystem? What are the components of an ecosystem? How do organisms 
interact with each other in an ecosystem? 
An ecosystem is all the living and non-living things in an area interacting with 
each other. Ecology is the study of how all these things interact in order to survive. 
Ecosystems vary in size. Some are small and some are much larger like the 
ecosystem of the desert of Africa, and the rainforest of Brazil that cover large 
areas of a country or continent. 
It doesn’t matter where they are or what they look like all ecosystems have the 
same elements. 
The non-living parts of an ecosystem are the ecosystem’s abiotic (a’biot’ik) 
factors. All living things need certain non-living things in order to survive. 
Abiotic factors include water, minerals, sunlight, air, climate, and soil. 
2.4.1 Factors that Affect the Distribution of 
Ecosystems 
Two primary non-biological factors have major impacts on the kind of ecosystem 
that develops in any part of the world: 
F precipitation F temperature
In turn, elevation (altitude) affects these primary factors.
Precipitation and Temperature 
How does temperature influence the distribution of vegetation? 
Precipitation and temperature are major factors that determine the vegetation in 
an ecosystem, In turn, the types of vegetation that result affect everything else 
in the ecosystem eventually. Figure 2.30 shows the impact of precipitation and 
temperature on vegetation.
Grade 10 Geography 106
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
The types and degrees of impact that precipitation has on an environment depend 
on several aspects of precipitation, including the total amount of precipitation 
per year, the form in which it arrives (rain or hail or snow), and its seasonal 
distribution. Precipitation might be evenly spaced throughout the year or it might 
be concentrated at particular times, creating wet and dry seasons. 
Temperature patterns are also important. They vary considerably in different parts 
of the world. For example, tropical areas have warm, relatively unchanging 
temperatures throughout the year, whereas the poles have long winters, with 
extremely cold temperatures, and relatively short, cool summers. In other areas, 
temperature variation is between those extremes, creating different types of cold 
and warm seasons.
Figure 2.30 illustrates the way that temperature and moisture influence the kind of 
vegetation that occurs in an area. Areas with low moisture and low temperatures 
produce tundra. Areas with high moisture and freezing temperatures during 
part of the year produce deciduous or coniferous forests. Dry areas produce 
deserts. Moderate amounts of rainfall or seasonal rainfall support grasslands 
or savannas. Areas with high rainfall and high temperatures support tropical 
rainforests.
The Effect of Elevation on Climate and Vegetation 
What makes higher altitudes cool? 
As height above sea level increases, the average temperature decreases. As one 
proceeds from sea level to the tops of mountains, it is possible to pass through a Average annual temperature (oC)
Average annual precipitation (cm of rain)
Temperate
deciduous
forest
Coniferous
forests
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
Tundra
Permanent ice
Deserts
Grasslands
Tropical dry
forest or 
savanna
Tropical
rainforests
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Figure 2.30: Impact of temperature and precipitation on vegetation
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 107
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS 2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
series of ecosystems that are similar to what would be encountered if one traveled 
from the equator to the north pole (see Figure 2.31).
The higher the altitude, the cooler the climate becomes. For example, This happens 
when we travel from the peripheral lowlands of Ethiopia to the mountains found 
in the northwest and southeast of the country. Even in the Tropics, tall mountains 
can have snow on the top, for example, on Mt. Kilimanjaro (see Figure 2.32). 
Thus, it is possible to experience the same change in vegetation by traveling up a 
mountain as one would experience traveling from the Equator to the north pole. 
Focus
An ecological system or, in short, an ecosystem, is a system formed by the 
interaction of all living organisms with each other in an area and with the 
chemical and physical factors of the environment in which they live. They 
are all linked by the transfers of energy and materials that constitutes the 
food chain. Ecology, on the other hand, is the scientific study of the interrelationships between living organisms and the environment. An ecological 
factor is any environmental factor which affects a living organism.
Figure 2.31: Relationships between altitude latitude, and vegetation
Grade 10 Geography 108
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
2.4.2 Diversity of Fauna, Flora and Soil of 
Ecosystems 
Among many factors that shape the type of fauna, flora and soil type of an ecosystem, 
climate plays a decisive role in their distribution and activities. 
The land on earth is divided into six major kinds of large ecosystems called biomes. 
The six biomes are: desert, tundra, grass land, decidious forest, taiga and tropical 
rain forest. Each biome has its own kind of climate, soil, plants and animals. Each 
biome can be found in different parts of the world. For example a desert biome is 
found in North America, Africa, South America, Asia and Australia. 
Figure 2.32: Mount Kilimanjaro
It is the highest mountain (5895 m) in Africa. 
It is found in Tanzania along the border with 
Kenya. It rises to about 4000 m above the 
surrounding surface, rising through rainforest, 
moorland, alpine desert, snow fields and ice 
cliffs, and all of these phenomena are virtually 
on the equator (3o
S latitude)! 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 109
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS 2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
Desert
What is desert? What characterizes it? 
A lack of water is the primary factor that determines that an area will be a desert. 
Deserts are areas that generally average less than 25 centimeters of precipitation 
per year. They are also likely to be windy. 
Plants and animals are many species, but they typically have low numbers of 
individuals. However, those species that are present are specially adopted to 
survive in dry, often hot or cold environments. For example, water evaporates 
from the surfaces of leaves. As an adaptation to this condition many desert plants 
have very small leaves that allow them to conserve water. Some, such as cactus, 
have the ability to store water in their spongy bodies or their roots for use during 
drier periods. 
Other plants are ephemerals, only bursting into life when rain falls, flowering and 
producing seeds which may then lie dormant for years until the next rain falls. 
The Rose of Jericho, a plant of the Middle East, is a good example of this type. 
All of the animals that live in deserts are able to survive with a minimal amount 
of water. They generally have an outer skin that resists water loss, so they lose 
little water by evaporation. 
Due to lack of moisture and vegetation in hot desert areas there has been little true 
development of soil, the surface simply consisting of drifted sand, pavements of 
bare rock, gravel or boulders. 
 
(A)
(B)
Figure 2.33: Desert landscape 
Drought-resistant scrubs and camels (A)
and sand dunes (B). 
Grade 10 Geography 110
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
Tundra 
Why is tundra called a treeless region? 
The harsh climate of the high latitudes around the Poles prevents the growth of 
most plants. Indeed, the very word tundra means’ a treeless plain. 
Even in mid summer only the top few centimetres of ground thaws out and 
beneath this it is permanently frozen - Permafrost. In addition to lichens and 
mosses which are the basic ‘building blocks’ of the tundra ecosystem, a range of 
grasses and sedges with dwarf and creeping plants are to be found. 
Under natural conditions, the tundra vegetation was grazed by large migratory 
herds of caribou and reindeer. Other grazing animals of the tundra include the 
musk ox, which survives the cold by means of extremely thick coat. Predators 
include polar bears and the arctic fox, which is largely dependant on the huge 
numbers of ground - nesting birds that migrate to the tundra to breed during the 
short summer. Among them are several species of geese, wild fowl and wading 
birds. One of the most remarkable of these is the Emperor penguin, adapted to 
withstand the Antarctic cold by a thick layer of blubber and a fine covering of 
feathers. 
The sub soil remains permanently frozen and the surface layer is waterlogged 
since water cannot percolate through the impermeable permafrost. 
Figure 2.34: A desert ecosystem, the Sahara Desert 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 111
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS 2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
The lack of oxygen in these water logged conditions restricts bacterial action so 
that the remains of the tundra vegetation only partly decompose and accumulate 
as a layer of peat, stained black by acid humus. 
Grass Lands 
Why do grasses become dominant in the region? 
Temperate grasslands are also known as prairies or steppes and typically savannas 
are tropical grass lands (Figure 2.35). Grass lands generally receive between 25 
and 75 centimeters of precipitation per year. Grasses make up 60 to 90 percent 
of the vegetation. Many other kinds of flowering plants are interspersed with 
grasses. 
In areas where the human population is small, huge herbivore animals including 
elephants, zebras, wildebeest, gazelles and antelopes, roam across the African 
plains. Carnivores, such as lions, cheetahs and leopards, prey on the grazing 
herds, along with scavenging jackals, hyenas and vultures. 
The soil of tropical grasslands are strongly influenced by the lengthy droughts 
that alternate with wet seasons. 
Figure 2.35: Typical East African grassland savanna, a region of 
wet-and-dry climate (Aw), after Ahrens, 2007
Grade 10 Geography 112
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
Deciduous Forest
Why do trees shed their leaves during winter in deciduous forest? 
This is a forest biome with many trees that lose their leaves each year. This is 
where broad-leaved trees grow. Each autumn the leaves turn yellow, orange and 
red painting the land with glorious colors. Then, the leaves fall to the ground 
which is what deciduous means and decay. The dead leaves help make the soil 
rich and fertile. Trees shade leaves to conserve water. 
These areas generally receive 75 to 100 centimeters of relatively evenly 
distributed precipitation per year. In deciduous forests of North America and 
Europe, common tree species are maples, birch, beech, elm, oaks, and other hard 
woods. In addition many small flowering plants bloom in the spring. 
These forests are home to a great variety of insects like beetles, moth larvae, 
wasps and ants. The birds that live in these forests are primary migrants that arrive 
in the spring of the year. A few kinds of birds including woodpeckers, turkeys, 
geese and some finches, are year-round residents. Amphibian and reptiles prey on 
insects and other small animals. 
Several kinds of small and large mammals inhabit these areas mice, squirrels, 
deer, shrews, moles, and opossums are common examples. Major predators on 
these mammals are foxes, badgers weasels, coyotes and birds of prey. 
Taiga, (Coniferous Forest) 
How does coniferous forests differ from deciduous forests? 
The climate is one of short, cool summers and long winters with abundant 
snowfall. Precipitation ranges between 25 and 100 centimeters per year. 
Conifers such as spruces, firs and larches are the most common trees in these 
areas. These trees are specifically adapted to winter conditions. The needle - 
shaped leaves are adapted to prevent water loss. 
The branches of these trees are flexible, allowing them to bend under a load 
of snow so that the snow slides off the pyramid - shaped trees without greatly 
damaging them. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 113
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS 2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
Most birds are migratory and feed on the abundant summer insect population, 
which is not available during the long, cold winter. Typical mammals are deer, 
caribou, moose, wolves, weasels, mice, snowshoe hares, and squirrels. 
In this cold climate, in which precipitation exceeds evaporation, the needles and 
litter from the coniferous trees are slow to decay. 
When they do so, they form an acidic humus soil. This severely restricts the 
variety of plant species able to grow here. Those that do occur, such as conifers, 
are those species that require few nutrients. 
Tropical Rainforest 
In which biome do we find Earths tallest trees? 
Tropical forests are located near the equator. 
The temperature is normally warm and relatively constant. Most areas receive 
in excess of 200 centimeters of rain per year - some receive 500 centimetres or 
more. Because of the warm temperatures and abundant rainfall, most plants grow 
rapidly; however soils are usually poor in nutrients because water tends to carry 
away any nutrients not immediately taken up by plants. Many of the trees have 
extensive root networks, associated with fungi, near the surface of the soil that 
allow them to capture nutrients from decaying vegetation before the nutrients can 
be carried away. 
They have a greater diversity of species than any others biome. More species 
are found in the tropical rainforests of the world than in the rest of the world 
combined. It is typical to have distances of a kilometer or more between two 
individuals of the same species. Balsa, teakwood, ironwood, mahogany, ebony 
and other ornamental woods are common. 
Associated with this variety of plants is an equally large variety of animals. Insects, 
such as ants, termites, moths, butterflies, and beetles, are particularly abundant. 
Birds also are extremely common, as are many climbing mammals, lizards, and 
tree frogs. Because of the low light levels and the difficulty of maintaining visual 
contact with one another, many of the animals communicate by making noise.
Grade 10 Geography 114
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
Activity 2.12
Part I
1 What are some of the adaptive mechanisms of plants in desert ecosystem? 
2 What is the reason for desert areas to have little true development of soil? 
3 Which plant species form the basic ‘building blocks’ of the tundra? 
4 Write some of the grazing and predator animals in tundra region? 
5 What climatic condition influence the soil of tropical grass lands? 
6 Which forest ecosystem trees lose their leaves during winter? 
7 Why is the coniferous forest plant variety limited? 
8 Why is the topical rainforest soils are poor in nutrients? 
9 Enumerate some of the hardwoods in tropical rainforest. 
10 Compare and contrast the soil types in tundra and tropical rainforest ecosystem.
11 Using Figure 2.38, identify which biome is not found in Africa and North America 
and why?
(A)
(B)
Figure 2.36: Tropical rainforests developed 
in areas with high annual rainfall (as much 
as 2400 mm – 4600 mm) and very warm 
temperatures. They have an extremely diverse 
mixture of plants – vines, orchids , ferns, and a 
wide variety of trees (A). Many animals, inhabit 
tropical rainforests, including more species of 
insects, reptiles, and amphibians than in any 
other part of the world. Rainforests are home to 
all sorts of colorful birds and to monkeys, and 
to other small and large mammals, including, 
in some places, elephants (toucan bird, (B))
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 115
2.4 ECOSYSTEMS 2.4 ECOSYSTEMS
Part II
In your geography work group, perform the following tasks.
12 What makes desert soils different from equatorial forest soils? 
13 Deforestation of tropical rainforests has become a pressing problem. 
a What is the cause of the problem? 
b How does the international community address the problem? 
c Being a member of the international community, what can be your 
contribution to the solution? 
Work with the other group members to write a report about task 3 and your 
results and opinions. 
Figure 2.37: The world’s basic biomes
NORTH
AMERICA
ASIA
Tropical rain forest Mediterranean scrub forest Semiarid region and desert
Tundra
Barren region
Savanna
Grassland
Temperate forest
Boreal forest
Grade 10 Geography 116
Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY
Þ The birth of our solar system began as dust and gases (nebula). Repeated 
collision caused the dust particles to change into planets in million years 
time. 
Þ The earth is one of the nine planets that, along with the others, revolves 
around the sun 
Þ The earth’s origin is related to the process of formation of the solar system 
Þ The earth is composed of a great central core and a series of surrounding 
layers, collectively known as mantle, and crust.
Þ Geologists estimate that the earth formed 4.6 billion years ago. 
Þ All divisions in the geological time scale are based on changes in existing 
fossils of organisms. 
Þ During the Precambrian era, Ethiopia was made up of huge mountains 
which were folded and faulted. 
Þ Continental drift theory suggests that continents were once joined together 
and later split and drift apart. 
Þ The earth system can be divided into four physical systems: the atmosphere, 
the lithosphere, the hydrosphere and the biosphere. 
Þ Rocks are naturally formed solid that is an aggregate of one or more 
different minerals. 
Þ Igneous rocks cover large areas of the central part of Ethiopia. 
Þ Soil is a complex mixture of inorganic minerals, decaying organic matter 
water, air and living organisms. 
Þ In the case of good quality soil materials, water and soil, and organic 
material account 45%, 25% and 5% respectively. 
Þ Some of soil conservation methods in Ethiopia include contour plough, strip 
cultivation and terracing. 
Þ Water erosion is the main cause of soil erosion in Ethiopia. 
Þ Koppen’s widley used classification of world climates is based on seasonsal 
variations in the annual and monthly averages of temperature and 
precipitation. 
Þ Climate change may be limited to a specifc region or may occur across 
the whole earth. 
Þ What the world is more worried about is that the changes that are occuring 
today have been speeded up because of man’s actvities. 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 117
Unit Review
Þ Desertification which is desert-like condition’s may spread over human 
habitats, croplands and wet lands as a consequence of climate change. 
Þ Temperature in Ethiopia is determined primarly by altitude and latitude. 
Þ Rainfall in Ethiopia is seasonal, varying in amount over space and time. 
There is the long and heavy summer rain accompained by short and 
moderate rains in autumn, winter and spring collectively known as ‘little 
rains’.
Þ Ethiopia is a highland country and much of its climate is affected by 
altitude.
Þ Drought is a condition that happens when much less rain is received than 
expected. 
Þ Although famine and starvation can result from drought, they are not its 
necessary consequences. 
Þ High drought probability zone is Ethiopia include part of the Somali and 
Afar regions, part of Tigray, eastern Amhara and southern part of the 
Oromia region. 
Þ Some of drought – coping mechanism in Ethiopia are: careful planned 
land use, planting crops of low – water dependency, rain water harvesting 
and planting tree in degraded areas. 
Þ Latitude affects the distribution of vegetation and as a result low latitude 
support equatorial forests where polar areas entertain tundra vegetation. 
Þ Because of the effect of altitude vegetation variation is similar when we 
travel up a mountain as one would traveling from the equator to the North 
pole. 
Þ Climate is the main factor that facilitate the development of soils in different 
ecosystems.
Þ Precipitation and temperatrue are major factors that determine the 
vegetation in an ecosystem. 
Þ As one proceeds from sea level to the tops of mountains, it is possible 
to pass through a series of ecosystems that are similar to what would be 
encountered if one traveled from the equator to the north pole. 
Þ Among many factors that shape the type of fauna, flora and soil type of an 
ecosystem, climate plays a decisive role in their distribution and activities. 
Grade 10 Geography 118
Unit Review
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 2
I Match the descriptions given under column ‘A’ with the terms 
listed under column ‘B’. 
A B
1 The study of living and non-living things 
interacting with their environment.
2 Photosynthesis can be possible only in its 
presence. 
3 Living things in the ecosystem.
4 Includes all species in a certain place.
5 All the populations living in an area.
6 The function and activities of the 
organism.
7 The area in which an organism lives.
8 Areas with low moisture and low 
temperature.
9 The most diversified ecosystem.
10 Global temperature has risen by 0.6o
C 
over the past century.
11 Non-living things.
12 Occupies transitional zone between 
tropical climate and hot deserts.
13 It is dry year round.
14 Flooding is less likely.
15 All forms of moisture that come to the 
ground from the air.
A Tundra
B Water
C Desert
D Savannah
E Tropical rainforest
F Abiotic factor
G Biotic factor
H Ecology
I Community
J Sandy soil
K Niche
L Habitat
M Population
N Precipitation
O Greenhouse gases
II Choose the word or phrase that best answers the question.
16 Which one of these had the longest geological time? 
A the Paleozoic era
B the Cenozoic era
C the Precambrian era
D the Mesozoic era 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 119
Unit Review
17 In which era did the dinosaurs live? 
A Mesozoic
B Paleozoic
C Cenozoic 
D Precambrian 
18 What two important elements constitute the earth’s innermost core? 
A Potassium and magnesium
B Nickel and iron 
C Granite and basalt
D Magma and lava 
19 During which era did huge mountain building take place in Ethiopia? 
A Mesozoic
B Precambrian
C Cenozoic
D Paleozoic 
20 When was the Ethiopian Rift Valley formed? 
A Quaternary period
B Tertiary period
C Carboniferous period
D None of the above 
21 Who was the first person who tried to explain the present location and 
distribution of the seven continents, using the Continental Drift theory? 
A Darwin
B Alfred Wegener
C Harry H. Hess
D Sir Francis Bacon 
22 Which of the following is an example of a clastic sedimentary rock? 
A Limestone 
B Coal
C Sandstone
D Chalk
23 During what process are sediments pressed together? 
A Cooling
B Melting
C Compaction 
D Weathering 
24 Which of these is a bioclastic sedimentary rock? 
A Salt 
B Conglomerate 
C Coal 
D Limestone 
Grade 10 Geography 120
Unit Review
25 In which part of Ethiopia do we find metallic minerals in association with 
Precambrian rock? 
A The western part of the country.
B The southern and eastern parts of the country.
C The northern part of the country.
D In all parts of the country.
26 Which of these soil types has a coarse texture? 
A Silt
B Sand
C Loam
D Clay 
27 Which land use has made the most critical contribution to the problem of 
soil erosion in Ethiopia? 
A Wildfire
B Deforestation
C Overgrazing
D Road construction 
28 According to the Kðppen classification of climate, letter B stands for: 
A Tropical climate 
B Polar climate 
C Dry climate 
D Temperate climate
29 Which months are the warmest in most part of Ethiopia? 
A September, October and November. 
B March, April and May 
C June, July and August 
D December, January and February 
30 Which part of Ethiopia is the wettest? 
A Norther
B Eastern 
C Southwestern 
D Northwestern
31 Which one of these traditional climate zones is dominated by acacia 
vegetation? 
A Woina dega
B Dega
C Bereha
D Wurch
32 Which traditional climate zone is associated with Afro-alpine areas? 
A Kolla 
B Dega 
C Wurch 
D Woina dega 
Unit 2: THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE WORLD AND ETHIOPIA 121
Unit Review
33 Which one of these bodies of water is a source of keremt rainfall to most 
parts of Ethiopia? 
A Red Sea 
B Indian Ocean 
C Atlantic Ocean 
D Mediterranean Sea
34 Planting trees to replace trees destroyed by deforestation refers to.
A Afforestation 
B Logging 
C Reforestation 
D Terracing 
35 What two non-biological factors contribute the most to ecosystem 
development? 
A Soil and temperature 
B Precipitation and temperature 
C Water and organisms
D None of the above 
36 Which of the following services that forests perform is the most valuable 
one? 
A Their soil-conservation functions 
B Their contribution to lumbering activities
C Their service as a sink of carbon 
D Their service as a habitat
III Define the following terms. 
a Pangaea 
b tectonics
c transform boundaries 
d biosphere 
e compaction 
f divergent boundary 
g extrusive 
h sedimentary rock 
i cementation 
j hydrosphere 
k lithosphere 
l anthracite 
Grade 10 Geography 122
Unit Review
IV Answer the following questions. Support your answers with 
reasons appropriate to the issues. 
37 Why are the equatorial forests so valuable? 
38 Is there any other carbon storage (sink) on earth than equatorial forests? 
39 Why are world equatorial forests shrinking over time? 
40 Why are equatorial forest soils nutrient-poor? 
V Study the rainfall map of Ethiopia on Figure 2.28 in association 
with the political map and answer the following questions.
41 Which parts of Ethiopia receive the highest and lowest amounts of rainfall? 
42 In which rainfall regime are the following towns located? 
a Gore 
b Gambella
c Mekele
d Gonder
e Dire Dawa
f Semera
g Hawassa
h Addis Ababa
i Nekemte
j Jijiga
