As you remember, in grade nine you learnt about the five major economic 
activities (primary, secondary, tertiary, quaternary and quinary) with their 
associated characteristics. 
In this unit you will read about the three major categories of economic systems of 
the world and issues related to sustainable economic development. 
You will also examine the role and functions of world economic organizations 
such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World 
Trade Organization (WTO). The concept and the various impacts of globalization 
will also be treated. 
4.1 TYPES OF ECONOMIC SYSTEMS 
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ Discuss the concept of different economic systems; 
Þ Compare and contrast the types of economic systems. 
Key Terms 
³ Traditional economy 
³ Mixed economy
³ Market economy
³ Command economy 
A major change occurred about 10,000 years ago, when people began to produce 
crops and to domesticate animals. This advance led to increased food supplies.
Start-up Activity
Discuss the following questions in your group. 
1 Why have different countries of the world followed different types of economic 
systems?
2 Which economic system is currently used for Ethiopia’s economy? Why? 
3 What factors affect the economic decisions of a society? Mention some of them 
and describe their roles in your locality’s economic affairs. 
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 183
4.1 Types Of Economic Systems 4.1 Types Of Economic Systems 
What is an economic system? 
An economic system is the means or structures in a society within which decisions 
about what to produce, how and when to produce goods and services and where 
to allocate them are made and implemented. 
The way a society makes economic decisions may closely reflect the pattern of 
its culture. It also tells about the society’s politics, religion, and even its approach 
to family. 
To achieve economic growth and development, different countries use different 
approaches or systems. That means economic problems can be solved in various 
ways. Here are the major economic systems practiced in the world: 
Â Traditional economic system 
Â Free market economic system 
Â Command economic system 
Â Mixed economic system 
Traditional Economy 
What are traditional economies? Can you cite a primitive people who still live 
in traditional economies (especially in Africa)? Do we have such communities 
in Ethiopia? What are the basic features of a traditional economy? 
It is an economic system in which primitive people produce just to feed their 
households with very little goods or services left over for sale or exchange in the 
market. Production is geared towards subsistence and basic survival. The system 
employs simple, backward and traditional means (techniques) in the process of 
food production.
Market and money are of little importance, and trade is mainly by a barter system. 
Thus, exchange of goods is limited. Answers to the “for whom” and “how much” 
questions are fixed by custom, habit, religion, or law in traditional cultures. 
Example, the Bushmen of the Kalahari Desert have rules for sharing their kills 
among the hunters and their families. The largest share usually goes to the best 
hunter. In this way, the best hunters survive when games are secured. 
Grade 10 Geography 184
4.1 Types Of Economic Systems 
Focus
Traditional economic systems are practiced in extremely backward areas or 
primitive societies like hunters and gatherers. Generally, it is characterized by:
F lack of knowledge of science and technology, 
F low productivity. 
F a low level of exchange of goods. 
Market Economy
What is market economy? What is the role of the government in a market 
economy? How is market economy different from traditional economy? What 
are the weak and strong sides of market economy? 
Market economy is an economic system in which individuals, rather than 
government, make the main decisions regarding economic activities and 
transactions. Individuals are free to make economic decisions concerning their 
employment, how to use or accumulate capital, what expenditures to make, and 
whether to use their resources now or to save them for later consumption. 
Focus 
In a market economy, the basic economic questions are answered by the 
interplay of buyers and sellers. There is no overall planning, as there is with 
command economic systems. The guiding principle of market systems is 
self-interest. Sellers want to sell at the highest prices. Buyers want to buy 
at the lowest prices. The bargains that buyers and sellers make, therefore, 
give the answers to the questions.
It is important to know that there is no pure free-market economy in the world. 
Governments interfere in organizing market economy in many ways and for many 
reasons. Most governments play an important role in dealing with problems of 
inflation and employment. They are also concerned with providing education for 
the society, strengthening national defense, controlling prices of power supply 
and food, and imposing taxes. 
The main proponents of free-market economies believe and forward a number 
of advantages of free market economies, such as encouraging individual 
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 185
4.1 Types Of Economic Systems 4.1 Types Of Economic Systems 
responsibility for decisions. They also believe that economic freedom is essential 
to political freedom. 
Free-market economies are also criticized. Opponents believe that a free-market 
economy cannot ensure basic social values such as alleviating poverty or ensuring 
equitable income distribution. It may also permit the accumulation of wealth and 
strong vested interests that could threaten the survival of political freedom. 
Focus
Generally, market economy is characterized by: 
F private property.
F economic freedom.
F prices that are determined by the law of supply and demand.
F decentralized decision making. 
Command Economy 
What does “command economy” mean? Which countries of the world still follow 
command economic systems? What are the unique features of command economy? 
In a command economy, the government makes decisions about production and 
consumption. This implies that the government decides what to produce, how to 
produce and for whom to produce. Also the governments own all factories, land, 
housing, etc. 
Focus
The command economic system still exists in some countries, such as North 
Korea, Cuba and China. It is characterized by: 
F a master plan for supply and price. 
F the government develops and enforces plans. 
F goods and services are distributed through government agencies.
State ownership of resources actually reduces personal incentive, effort and 
initiative. At best, in a command economic system, the basic economic questions 
are answered by a group of planners. They have the power to make economic 
decisions for the society as a whole. However, this type of economy is fading 
away in the world. 
Grade 10 Geography 186
4.1 Types Of Economic Systems 
Mixed Economy
What are the roles of government and private sectors in mixed economic system?
In this type of economic system, both government and private sectors play 
an important role in answering the “what”, “how’ and “for whom” questions 
concerning society as a whole. 
In the mixed system, the government may not only own and run key industries, 
means of transport, power, and water supply, etc., but it also intervenes to prevent 
monopolies and ensure free competition. In addition, it might influence prices 
of agricultural products, rather than allowing them to be influenced by market 
forces. It might also offer incentives (tax relief, grants, exemptions or penalties) 
to encourage particular activities (e.g., tree planting). 
Most countries of the world have mixed economies (for example, France and 
Sweden). Some are close to command economy while others rely more on market 
economy. In a mixed economy, there is competition between the government and 
the private sectors. Sometimes, those that are unable to compete soon die away. 
Focus
Traditional economic systems make decisions the way they have always 
been made in the past. Command systems permit a group of planners to 
answer the basic economic questions. Market systems rely on exchange 
and a network of prices to determine issues of what, how, for whom, and 
how much, while mixed economy is characterized partly by free-market. 
Activity 4.1
Discuss the following in your group. Then present your findings to the class.
1 What are the advantages and disadvantages of free-market economy in the 
context of Ethiopia? 
2 Compare and contrast the role of the government in Ethiopia’s economy before 
1991 and after 1991 (i.e., the economic policies of the “Derg” and of the current 
government). What improvements did you observe? Why? Support your answer 
with evidence from your locality. 
3 Do you think that Ethiopia strictly follows free-market economy these days? 
Why? 
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 187
4.1 Types Of Economic Systems 4.2 Sustainable Economic Development
4.2 SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ Explain the concept of sustainable economic development;
Þ Justify the indicators of economic development.
Key Terms 
³ sustainable development
³ environment 
³ gross domestic product
³ gross national product
³ developed countries 
³ precipitate income
³ standard of living
³ developing countries 
Activity 4.2
Discuss the following in your group. 
1 Why does Ethiopia lag behind rich countries in its standard of living? 
2 How can Ethiopia catch up with the rich countries without endangering its 
environment? 
3 What are the means for harmonizing the relationship between development 
and environment in your locality? 
4 How do you relate fast economic development and global warming? 
Concept and Indicators of Economic Development 
What is development? How do you relate sustainability with development? 
What does sustainable development mean? 
Development is a difficult concept to define. The term development means 
different things to different people. Therefore, possible definitions include a wide 
range of elements (see Figure 4.1).
Development
Population Environment 
Poverty 
Growth
Rural 
Issues
Urban 
Issues
Global 
Player
Figure 4.1: The Environment of development
Grade 10 Geography 188
4.2 Sustainable Economic Development
What do you understand from Figure 4.1? How do you relate development with 
the terms noted in each box of Figure 4.1? 
Despite the complexity of the issue, we have some definitions that can go well 
with the term development. Development is a process by which members of a 
society increase their personal and institutional capacities to mobilize and manage 
resources to produce sustainable improvements in their quality of life. 
Focus 
The most recent definition of development: Development – represents the 
whole package of change by which an entire social system moves away 
from a condition of life perceived as unsatisfactory towards a situation or 
condition of life that is materially and spiritually better (Todaro and Smith, 
2009: 16). 
What are the main points included in the definition? Can you explain them 
briefly? What are the main objectives of development in any society? 
Development in any society must have at least the following three objectives: 
a To increase the availability and widen the distribution of basic lifesustaining goods, such as food, shelter, health services and clothing. 
b To raise living standards and levels of income, employment, education and 
attention to cultural and human values. 
c To expand the range of economic and social choices. 
What should be done to accomplish the above objectives? Can you mention 
some of the efforts made in your locality? 
Generally, economic development strategies should give due attention to 
increasing the productive capacities of human wealth and the health of the 
environment. This is done by concentrating on the following: 
i Making sure that the nation has a labor force that is ready to work, 
hardworking and energetic.
ii Improving the skill and the ability of the working force. 
iii Ensuring the human labor force has adequate medical care (in order 
to maintain its productiveness). 
iv Improving the supply, multiplication and distribution of modern and 
environmentally friendly technology and other inputs. 
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 189
4.2 Sustainable Economic Development 4.2 Sustainable Economic Development
In addition, in order to ensure sustainable development attention must be given 
to the environment. 
What does sustainable development mean? 
Focus 
According to the World Commission of Environment and Development 
(1987), “Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of 
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs”.
In other words, sustainability implies that future growth and overall quality of 
life are critically dependent on the quality of the environment. To destroy the 
environment in the pursuit of short-term economic goals, jeopardizes present 
and especially future generations. This is the level of extraction that could be 
maintained without lessening future levels. 
That is why sustainability is a current paradigm for thinking about a future in 
which environmental, societal and economic considerations are balanced in the 
pursuit of development and improved quality of life. 
Sustainable development has three components, which are shown in Figure 4.2. 
The area of overlap (i.e., the intersecting and shaded part of the three circles at the 
center) represents human wellbeing. As the environment, society and economy 
become more aligned, the area of overlap increases, and so does human wellbeing. 
Generally, in order to achieve sustainable development, environmental protection 
must constitute an integral part of the development process, and cannot be 
considered in isolation from it. Eradicating poverty and reducing disparities in 
living standards in different parts of the world are essential goals for achieving 
sustainable development and meeting the needs of the majority of people. 
Society
Environment 
Economy
Figure 4.2: Components of sustainable 
development
Grade 10 Geography 190
4.2 Sustainable Economic Development
Activity 4.3
Perform the following in your geography workgroup by citing examples from your 
locality:
1 Briefly describe how the following affect the working culture in Ethiopia: 
i choice of jobs and considering one type of job inferior to the other. 
ii lack of punctuality in working hours and holidays. 
2 How can you improve and develop the habit of hard work in your locality? 
3 Is it possible to achieve economic growth in your locality without damaging 
the environment? How? 
Indicators of Economic Development 
What are the tools used to measure development? How do we classify countries 
at different levels of development? 
Indicators of development are measures, to a certain level, of development in a 
given country. 
The main indicators of development in the world include: 
Â GDP Â Per-capita income Â Standard of living 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
What is the GDP? 
The GDP is a measure of the market value of commodities. It is the total value of 
currently produced final goods and services within a country’s borders, usually in 
a year, irrespective of who owns the outputs. 
In developing countries, the GDP is not only low, but it is also dominated by 
primary commodities. On the other hand, secondary and tertiary economic 
activities contribute the biggest shares to the GDP in the developed countries 
Per-Capita Income 
How can the per-capita income of a country be measured? 
It is another indicator of development. It is strongly related to the GDP. Of course, 
as a measure of peoples’ quality of life it is indicative of their standard of living. 
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 191
4.2 Sustainable Economic Development 4.2 Sustainable Economic Development
Focus 
The Gross National Product (GNP) is the total value of goods and services 
produced by a country in a year, including incomes secured from abroad, 
through varied activities. 
You can calculate per-capita income, using the following formula: 
Example
Suppose gross domestic product (GDP) of a country for a given year is $50 
billion, total population is 25 million, income earned by foreigners from the 
domestic economy is $100 million, and income earned by nationals from 
abroad is $250 million. What is the percapita income for the country? 
In the same way as the GDP, per-capita income for developed countries is very 
high and growing. This is the result of ever-increasing GDPs that are based on 
diversified urban industrial and commercial economies. Developing countries, on 
the other hand, have low per-capita incomes, whose bases are primary economy 
that lack diversification. 
GDP
Total Population
Per-capita income =
Income secured from abroad
GDP ± income taken away byforeigners
Total population
      − =
 
50 bill (250mill 100mill) Per capita Income = 25mill
50 bill 150 mill
25 mill
± −
± =
50,150,000,000
25,000,000
Per capita income = $2006
=
you have to add them, because 
50bill + 150 mill income secured from abroad is
25 mill greater than income taken away
by foreigners
   
=
 
Grade 10 Geography 192
4.2 Sustainable Economic Development
Standard of Living 
Why is living standard considered the best measure of development? 
Living standard is perhaps the best measure of the quality of life of a given 
society. It is directly related to both the GDP and per-capita income. This is 
because, as the latter get higher, the former improves, and vice versa. Developed 
countries have high and constantly growing living standards, while people of the 
developing world are characterized by low living standards. 
Based on the above and other indicators of development, countries of the world 
can be classified and named in different ways such as rich/poor, developed/
developing, north/south, first/second world, and more developed/less developed. 
Also, using current development status as a criteria, they can be grouped as: 
developed, less developed and least developed. 
How do you explain the economic improvement you observe in less developed 
countries like Ethiopia? What are the dominant economic activities that define 
each group of countries? 
The developed countries are the world’s richest nations. This is because their 
economy is urban-based, industrial and specialized in commercial activities, 
supported by sophisticated technology and infrastructure (see Table 4.1). Less 
developed countries include the bulk of the world’s countries, which are found 
in Africa, Latin America, and Asia. They have traditional economic systems, 
largely based on agriculture, mining or a combination of both. 
Table 4.1: The world’s top 10 developed countries 
Country 
GDP percapita income 
(US$) (1) 
(2008)
Adult 
literacy 
(%) (2)
Annual 
population 
growth rate (%) 
(3) (2009)
Life 
expectancy 
(years) (4) 
(2010)
Urban 
population 
(%) (4) 
(2010)
USA 46,108 99 0.6 78 79
Japan 38,591 99 0.19 83 86
France 44,121 99 0.56 81 77
Norway 94,505 99 0.34 81 80
Germany 44,394 99 -0.05 80 73
Canada 45,049 99 1.3 81 80
United 
Kingdom 43,149 99 0.47 80 80
Switzerland 65,167 99 1.1 82 73
Italy 38,302 98.9 -0.05 82 68
Sweden 52,236 100 0.48 81 84
Source: (1) UNCTAD Handbook of Statistics, UN; New York 2009; (2) UNDP Report 2009; 
(3) CIA world fact book 2009; (4) 2010 Population Reference Bureau.
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 193
4.2 Sustainable Economic Development 4.2 Sustainable Economic Development
The least developed countries, as their name implies, are the poorest nations of 
the world. By all standards, these countries have the most backward economic 
and social systems. Hence, mass poverty is a common feature of the majority of 
the populations of these countries (see Table 4.2). 
Table 4.2: The least developed countries of the world 
Country 
GNP percapital in come 
(US$) 2008 (1)
Adult 
literacy (%) 
2009 (2)
Annual 
population 
growth rate (%) 
(3) 2009 
Life 
expectancy 
(years) 2010 
(4)
Urban 
population 
(%) (4) 
2010
Afghanistan 425 28.1 2.6 44 22
Bangladesh 485 53.5 1.4 66 25
Benin 773 40.5 3.0 59 41
Burkina Faso 553 28.7 3.4 53 23
Bhutan 2025 52.8 1.5 50 15
Burundi 148 59.3 2.8 50 10
Central African 
Republic 464 48.6 1.9 49 38
Chad 817 30.8 2.07 49 27
Comoros 801 75.1 2.4 64 28
Ethiopia 261 35.9 2.6 55 16
Guinea 437 29.5 2.6 57 28
Guinea – Bissau 272 64.6 2.02 46 30
Haiti 849 62.1 1.6 61 48
Laos 849 68.7 1.8 65 27
Lesotho 755 82.2 0.8 41 23
Activity 4.4
Perform the following activities in pairs and present your opinions to the class.
1 Compare and contrast Table 4.1 and Table 4.2 in relation to the prevailing socioeconomic and demographic differences that exist between the developed and 
the least developed countries. 
2 What measures can be taken to improve the development processes of the 
developing countries? What roles could be played by developed countries in 
this respect? 
3 What new jobs have been created for the working population in your locality 
in the last 10 years? If none, why? 
Grade 10 Geography 194
4.3 Economic Organizations Of The World
4.3 ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS OF THE 
WORLD
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ identify world economic organizations; 
Þ realize the contribution of world economic organizations to development; 
Þ discuss the concept of globalization; 
Þ compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of globalization. 
Key Terms 
³ World Bank
³ IMF
³ Structural adjustment
³ Intellectual property rights 
³ WTO
³ Globalization
³ Deregulation
³ GATT
4.3.1 Economic Organizations of the World
Can you name economic organizations that serve at a global level? How do 
they contribute to the economic development of nations across the world? 
What influences and pressures are created by these global organizations upon 
the developing countries? 
Three key institutions serve as economic organizations of the world. They are 
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Trade 
Organization (WTO). All three organizations trace their origins to the end of 
World War II (1939-1945), when the United States and the UK decided to set 
up new organizations and rules for the global economy. Since then, these three 
economic organizations have played a large role across the world. The following 
subsections highlight each of them.
World Bank 
What roles are played by the World Bank in developing countries? Can you cite 
some examples from Ethiopia? 
The World Bank is a specialized agency of the United Nations. It was established 
in 1944. It grants loans to member nations for the purpose of reconstruction and 
development. Officially, it is called the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (IBRD). 
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 195
4.3 Economic Organizations Of The World 4.3 Economic Organizations Of The World
The World Bank is the largest known private development bank. It operates 
internationally and has its headquarters in the United States in Washington, D.C. 
It makes large loans to governments of developing countries to finance projects 
intended to strengthen the economies of these nations. The World Bank finances 
projects such as building roads, dams for power generation, and industries. 
Beginning in 1968, the bank also focused on low-cost loans for health, education 
and other basic needs of the world’s poor. 
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
What makes the IMF different from the World Bank? 
The IMF was established in the same year as the World Bank (1944) with the aims 
of encouraging exchange stability, eliminating exchange controls, promoting 
international monetary cooperation, and expanding world trade. 
In other words, the IMF makes loans so that countries can maintain the values 
of their currencies and repay foreign debt. Countries accumulate foreign debt 
when they buy more from the rest of the world than they sell abroad. They then 
need to borrow money to pay the difference, which is known as balancing their 
payments. After banks and other institutions will no longer lend them money, 
they turn to the IMF to help them balance their payment positions with the rest 
of the world. 
The IMF initially focused on Europe, but by the 1970’s it changed its focus to the 
less developed economies. 
What preconditions do the World Bank and the IMF demand of developing 
countries before providing the aforementioned benefits? Do the demands favor 
the developing countries? Why? 
Focus 
Both the IMF and the World Bank usually impose certain conditions for 
loans and require what are called structural adjustment programmes from 
borrowers. The programs are based on a strategy that is geared towards 
promoting free markets, including privatization (the selling of government 
enterprises); deregulation (removing rules that restrict companies); and 
trade liberalization (opening local markets to foreign goods by removing 
barriers to exports and imports). Finally, the strategy also calls for 
shrinking the role of government, reducing taxes, and cutting back on 
publicly provided services. 
Grade 10 Geography 196
4.3 Economic Organizations Of The World
World Trade Organization (WTO)
How does the WTO differ from the World Bank and the IMF? Do you support 
or oppose the WTO? Why? 
The World Trade Organization is an international body that promotes and enforces 
provision of trade laws and regulations. It has the authority to administer and put 
in place new and existing free trade agreements, to oversee world trade practices, 
and to settle trade disputes among member states. 
Focus 
The WTO was established in 1994 to replace the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and began its operation on January 1,1995 in 
Geneva, Switzerland. Since then, the WTO has increased the scope of 
trading agreements. Today such agreements no longer involve only the 
trade of manufactured products but also involve services, investments and 
the protection of intellectual property rights (that is, creative works that 
can be protected legally), such as patents and copyrights. For example, the 
United States receives over half of its international income from patents 
and royalties for use of copyrighted material. 
The WTO is also a formally structured organization whose rules are legally 
binding for its member states. The organization provides a framework for 
international trade law. Members can refer trade disputes to the WTO, where 
a dispute panel composed of WTO officials serves as arbitrator. Members can 
appeal to this panel’s rulings to a WTO affiliated body whose decisions are final. 
Disputes must be resolved within the time limits set by WTO rules. 
Since its creation, the WTO has attracted both supporters and opponents across 
the world. On the one hand, the opponents argue that: 
F the organization is too powerful because it can declare the laws and 
regulations of sovereign nations in violation of trade rules, in effect 
pressuring nations to change these laws, 
F WTO trade rules do not sufficiently protect workers’ rights, the 
environment, or human health,
F It also lacks democratic accountability because its hearings on trade 
disputes are closed to the public, the press, etc. 
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 197
4.3 Economic Organizations Of The World 4.3 Economic Organizations Of The World
On the other hand, WTO supporters argue that it plays a critical role in helping 
expand world trade and raise living standards around the world. 
Generally, the three key institutions that you have just learned about are considered 
the main actors or players who are shaping the current era of globalization. 
Activity 4.5
Discuss the following questions in your group. 
1 Could Ethiopia benefit from the WTO, if it were one of the member states? Why? 
2 How does the lack of strong enforcement of intellectual property rights 
laws adversely affect domestic trade in Ethiopia? Support your answer with 
examples. 
3 What possible measures do you suggest to enforce the respect of copyrights in 
your locality? 
4.3.2 Globalization
What is globalization? How do the least developed countries benefit from 
globalization? What are the effects of globalization? 
Globalization is the process by which people their ideas and their activities 
(economic, cultural, political) in previously relatively separated parts of the 
world become interconnected, and are drawn to the same social space at the 
same historical time. It does not imply homogenization, or the elimination of 
regional differences or uneven development. It leads to increased ecological 
inter-dependence; and the global world economy is based particularly on the 
transnactional movement of information and the mobile factors of production 
(capital, labour, technology). 
It is said that globalization is a powerful force for poverty reduction, but billions 
of people in the world are still left out of this process. However, with the 
development of the present trend, it seems evident that the world will be truly a 
global village. 
It must also be noted that there are continuing controversies and disputes over 
the value of globalization for the common good in society. Some argue that 
globalization works to the advantages of the leading industrialized countries of 
Europe and North America. They argue that a good deal of economic exchange 
takes place between regions rather than worldwide. For example, the European 
Grade 10 Geography 198
4.3 Economic Organizations Of The World
Union countries mostly trade among themselves, while those of Asia or North 
America do the same thing. Therefore, there is no international trade that benefits 
the world community as a whole. And so, globalization adds more to the misery 
and despair of the already poor and underdeveloped nations, while increasing the 
wealth of the rich countries. 
There are also others who have an opposite and positive view of globalization. 
These contenders argue that globalization is not only an economic phenomenon, 
as it affects all aspect of life. Therefore, they say, it is unavoidable. Because, 
according to them, the dramatic expansion of science and technology is 
interwoven with international relations among people of the world and no nation, 
whether poor or rich, can do away with globalization, but must adjust themselves 
to this new trend. 
The Advantages and Disadvantages of Globalization
Advantages 
What advantages do you think globalization has for third-world countries? 
1 It creates new opportunities and benefits. For instance, currently some of 
the Western industrialized nations removed tariff restrictions and opened 
their markets for the products of third-world countries. 
2 There are rules and principles by which globalization is governed. For 
example, some of the provisions require a country to open up its financial 
markets and eliminate controls on capital flow (both in and out). This will 
increase foreign direct investment, promote economic growth and lift the 
poor from poverty. 
3 Payments, known as “remittances” that developing countries international 
migrants send back to their countries (home) have become an important 
measure of the performance of a globalized world economy. For example, 
in 2009, remittances exceeded $300 billion, almost three times the total of 
foreign aid disbursements. 
Disadvantages 
What are the main disadvantages of globalization for developing countries? 
1 Globalization is unable to avoid the divergent interest clashes between the 
rich Western industrialized countries and the poor Developing countries. 
2 So far, globalization has not brought equality among nations. Although it 
can minimize the risk of one country harming another, it is difficult to think 
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 199
4.3 Economic Organizations Of The World 4.3 Economic Organizations Of The World
it will bring equality between the countries. This is because the nature and 
characteristics of globalization do not allow it to do so. 
3 The strong and wealthy nations have the power to promote certain of their 
advantages. 
4 Governments of the Western industrialized nations are ready to accept the 
principles of free market and make them practical in their relationships 
with developing countries. But they do this only when they are quite 
sure that their transcontinental corporations are the winners in the market 
competition. 
5 When the industrialized countries import products from the developing 
countries, they impose high tariffs because they want to protect and 
safeguard the interests of their local industries. This clearly shows that 
they do not exercise free-market principles. Rather they stick to a non-freemarket economic system. 
6 Another problem is that governments of Western industrialized nations 
subsidize their farmers because they want them to sell their agricultural 
products at lower prices than those of the imported ones from the 
developing countries. This throws doubt on the sincerity of the Western 
industrialized nations when they talk about the importance of globalization 
for the reduction of poverty in developing countries. 
7 Local markets in the developing countries may be dominated by the goods 
(particularly industrial) imported from industrialized countries the moment 
they open their doors to globalization. 
8 Globalization disregards the protection of the environment and hence 
developing countries suffer greatly from environmental degradation. 
Activity 4.6
Discuss the following in your group and then present your findings to the class. 
1 By providing practical examples, show how the disadvantages of globalization 
operate in Ethiopia. 
2 Some people say that globalization has lost its broader meaning and has 
become synonymous with the advance of capitalism. Others go farther and 
perceive globalization as Americanization in a new form of cultural invasion. 
Do you agree or disagree with this statement? Why? 
3 Do you think that compensation from industrialized countries is necessary 
to developing countries (like Ethiopia) in order to maintain third-world 
environments from the adverse (negative) effects of globalization? Why?
Grade 10 Geography 200
Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY
Þ The main economic systems of the world are grouped into traditional, free 
market, command and mixed economies. Each one of these systems has 
its own rules (decisions) and approaches to the economy that it runs. 
Þ Traditional economic systems are practiced in extremely backward areas 
and characterized by lack of knowledge of science and technology, low 
productivity and a low level of exchange of goods. 
Þ Market economy is an economic system which is characterized by private 
property, economic freedom (relatively), prices are determined by the law 
of supply and demand, and decentralized decision making. 
Þ In a command economy, the government makes decision about 
production and consumptions. Whereas in mixed economy system both 
government and private sectors play an important roles and may also 
compete to each other. 
Þ Sustainable economic development is the improvement of quality of life 
(both material and spiritual) without endangering future generations. 
Gross domestic product (GDP), per-capital income and living standards 
are some major indicators of economic development. Based on these 
measurements, countries of the world are often classified as developing 
and developed, although other terms are also used for this purpose. 
Þ The World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) are the three key financial institutions that play a great 
role in shaping the current era of globalization. 
Þ Despite their short comings, the world economic organizations have been 
playing a great roles in fostering development. For instance, World Bank 
have financing (through large loans) different projects in developing 
countries like building roads, dams (for HEP), industries, etc. IMF provide 
loans to those countries which couldn’t balance their foreign payments. 
WTO also plays a critical role in helping expand world trade and raise living 
standard around the world. 
Unit 4: Economic System And Development 201
Unit Review
Þ Globalization is the process by which people their ideas and their activities 
(economic, cultural, political) in previously relatively separated parts of the 
world become inter-connected, and drawn to the same social historical 
time. 
Þ Some of the advantages of globalization include creation of new 
opportunities and benefits (such as the removal of tariff restrictions), 
increment of direct foreign investment, remittance to home countries, etc. 
Its disadvantage is mainly related to the widening of the economic gaps 
between the rich and the poor nations. 
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 4
I Write True for correct statements and False for wrong 
statements. 
1 Most countries of the world have a free market economy. 
2 A traditional economic system is highly characterized by low productivity 
with intensive use of money in the market. 
3 Sustainable development is dependent on the quality of the environment. 
4 The GNP and GDP are more or less identical and are used to measure 
economic development. 
5 The WTO is dominated by wealthy industrialized countries and does not 
give less developed nations enough of a voice in formulating new trade 
rules. 
6 Less developed countries cannot benefit from globalization. 
II Match Column B with Column A.
A B
7 Environment of development 
8 IBRD 
9 Sustainable development 
10 Trade liberalization 
11 The best measure of economic 
development 
A Per-capital income 
B IMF 
C Population, poverty, growth etc. 
D WTO 
E Brundtland commission 
F Living standard
Grade 10 Geography 202
Unit Review
III Fill in the blanks in each statement. 
12 _________ is removing rules that restrict companies from working in freemarket economic systems. 
13 The three main components of sustainable development are _________,
_________ and _________. 
14 Currently, Ethiopia follows a _________ economic system. 
15 The three main institutions that are shaping the current era of globalization 
are _________ ,_________ and _________.
16 _________ and _________ are two examples of intellectual property rights. 
IV Answer the following questions in detail. 
17 Describe briefly how you and your school communities benefit from 
globalization. 
18 Why do Western industrialized countries subsidize their farmers? What 
impacts does this have upon the indigenous farmers of developing countries? 
19 Explain briefly the negative impacts of globalization on your local 
environment. 
20 The IMF requires developing countries to implement structural adjustments 
before they can receive loans. Do you think that this is fair? Why?