Most people think that geography is only a study of certain physical features such 
as place names, lengths of rivers, heights of mountains, names of countries, and 
capital cities of countries. Others think that geography studies the physical earth. 
However, it is much more. 
In Grade Nine, you learned about several definitions of geography proposed by 
different scholars. They enlightened you as to the nature of geography. Ancient 
Greeks defined geography for the first time. They combined two words:
F Geo – which means earth
F Graphic – which means writing
Therefore, their definition of geography was a description of the earth. Now 
this definition seems very general when we compare it to the scope of current 
geography. 
Some of the definitions were made by scholars of the nineteenth and twentieth 
century. These definitions relate to geography’s current concerns, interests and 
focus: 
Geography is:
F “a synthesizing discipline to connect the general with the particular 
through measurement, mapping, and a regional emphasis.” (Alexander 
von Humboldt, 1845)
F “nothing less than an understanding of the vast interacting system 
between human beings and their environment on the earth’s surface.” 
(E.A Acreman, 1953)
F «a science that is meant to provide accurate, orderly, and rational 
description and interpretation of the variable character of the earth’s 
surface.» (Richard Hartshorne, 1959)
F “a science concerned with the rational development and testing of 
theories that explain and predict the spatial distribution and location of 
various characteristics on the surface of the earth.” (M. Yeates, 1968)
F “concerned with the locational or spatial variation in both physical 
and human phenomena at the earth’s surface”. (Martin Kenzer, 1989)
F “the study of the patterns and processes of human- built and environmental 
(natural) landscapes, where the landscapes comprise real (objective) 
and perceived (subjective) space.” (Gregg Wassmansdorf, 1995)
F “the study of the environment of the earth’s surface and the relationship 
of humans to this environment, which includes both physical and cultural 
geographic features.” (Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2008) 
Grade 11 Geography 4
1.1 The Meaning Of Geography
Brain-Storming
1 What do you understand from the above definitions? 
2 Do you see any differences or similarities? Discuss these issues in your group.
As can be seen from the above definitions, geography does not have a single 
definition that is universally accepted. Nonetheless, most of the above definitions 
emphasize the fact that geography is a spatial science. Thus, it is possible to 
synthesize the given definitions and come up with a commonly acceptable 
definition. Accordingly, geography can be defined as “the study of the spatial 
distribution of both physical and human-made things and phenomena on the 
earth’s surface and the two-way interactions and interdependences between 
natural and human environments.” 
Therefore, geography is the study of:
F The physical world, its inhabitants, and the interaction between the 
two; The resultant patterns and systems of geographical phenomena; 
F Patterns and processes associated with causes; 
F Relationships between humans and their environment, with emphasis 
on spatial perspectives at varying scales.
Focus 
In its modern context, spatial perspective is concerned with “where” 
and “why there” questions investigating the forces behind the causes 
and the patterns manifested as a result.
While making spatial investigations, geographers ask five pertinent questions 
about the phenomena they study. These are:
F “WHERE are things located?”
F “WHY are they located where they are?”
F “WHEN did the things form?” 
F “WHAT things are found where?” and
F “HOW are they arranged?” 
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 5
1.1 The Meaning Of Geography 1.1 The Meaning Of Geography
Activity 1.1
In a small group, discuss what the “where”, “why there” and “how are they arranged” 
questions deal with. Present your results to the class. 
The answers to these basic questions are both descriptive and analytical. Answers 
to the “where” questions are primarily descriptive in nature as they try to describe 
the places where things and phenomena are found.
Similarly, answers to the “why there” question try to provide logical explanations 
as to what factors determine the location of the phenomena in the places where 
they are found.
On the other hand, the “How are they arranged” question is primarily analytical. 
The answer provides visual explanations of how the studied phenomena are 
spatially distributed. 
Geography tries to provide explanations about our world and the ways in which 
we live, work, and carry on socio-economic, political, and cultural activities. 
In short, geography is a science that investigates our cultural and natural 
environments, how we affect them, and how they affect us.
Consequently, it becomes important to note that geography is not only a study of 
place names, lengths of rivers, heights of mountains, areas of lakes, capital cities 
of countries and the like. It is much more than this. Geographer William Hughes 
proves it by stating the following: 
Mere names of places... are not geography... knowing by heart 
a whole gazetteer full of them would not, in itself, constitute 
anyone a geographer. Geography has higher aims than this: 
it seeks to classify phenomena (alike of the natural and of the 
political world, in so far as it treats of the latter), to compare, 
to generalize, to ascend from effects to causes, and, in doing 
so, to trace out the great laws of nature and to mark their 
influences upon humans. This is ‘a description of the world’-that 
is Geography. In a word Geography is a Science-a thing not of 
mere names but of argument and reason, of cause and effect.
 William Hughes 1863
Grade 11 Geography 6
1.2 The Scope Of Geography
Geography is a systematic observation and study of the world in spatial perspective. 
It contributes a lot to the understanding of our complex and fast changing world. 
By doing so, it helps us appreciate the great diversity and complexity of peoples 
and places and the existing two-way relationships between them.
Content Check
1 Compare and contrast the definitions of geography given by different 
scholars.
2 Can you justify why the definition which we presented as the collective 
agreement is appropriate and why it is widely accepted? 
3 What differentiates ancient and modern definitions of geography?
1.2 THE SCOPE OF GEOGRAPHY
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ determine the scope of geography. 
Key Terms
³ Scope 
³ Geosphere 
³ Spatial interaction 
³ Spatial distribution 
Brainstorming
1 Do you remember what you learned in Grade Nine about the scope of 
geography? 
2 What is scope by itself? Please, try to remember.
As you might remember, scope refers to the extent of interest or focus in a certain 
subject. In other words, it refers to the capacity and limits that an academic 
discipline treats. In this regard, geography is said to have a greater scope than 
mere locations. It treats a wide range of phenomena on the planet earth. Generally, 
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 7
1.2 The Scope Of Geography 1.2 The Scope Of Geography
the geo-sphere is considered as geography’s scope. The geo-sphere itself is 
made up of five sub spheres, namely the lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere 
(troposphere), biosphere and anthroposphere. Do you know what each of these 
spheres represents? If yes, good! Otherwise, please refer to Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: The geospheres of the earth
Geospheres Description Geography’s related area of 
study
Lithosphere The solid part- i.e., the 
rock layers of the earth Geomorphology, soil geography 
Troposphere
The lower part of the 
atmosphere where 
weather changes occur
Climatology
Hydrosphere
The water surfaces of the 
earth including oceans, 
seas and lakes
Oceanography
Biosphere The part of the earth that 
supports all sorts of life Biogeography 
Anthroposphere The earth’s cultural 
landscape
Cultural geography, population 
geography
Figure 1.1: The earth’s Geo-sphere
Troposphere
Hydrosphere Lithosphere
Biosphere
Anthroposphere
Grade 11 Geography 8
1.2 The Scope Of Geography
Brain-storming
1 What do you understand from the above table and figure? 
2 Have you seen how varied the area of study of geography is? 
3 Do you understand the extent of its scope?
Geography’s area of study is very wide and diverse in its nature. The subject 
deals with from the dry land mass of the lithosphere to the extensive oceans 
of the hydrosphere, from the earth’s crust (surface) high into its atmosphere 
(troposphere) and from the natural environment to human-related phenomena. 
Understanding geography is key to understanding and acting effectively in 
our world. It is a subject that enables people to understand the earth and its 
environment. It also enables us to appreciate the complex balances of the human 
and physical elements that bind people to this planet.
Activity 1.2
1 Do you think that the scope of geography is limitless? Why or why not? 
2 In your groups discuss the major areas of focus of geographical studies and 
present your results to your class.
It is true that geography has a very wide scope. However, this does not mean that 
its scope is limitless. 
The major areas that geography focuses on are:
F The earth, its position in the universe and its movements;
F The different physical features that constitute the earth’s surface, the 
forces that cause them, their variations from place to place and their 
changes over time;
F The different relationships between human beings and their natural 
environment. Also, the interdependence and the impact that each has 
on the other;
F The conditions of the lower part of the atmosphere and the subsequent 
weather and climatic conditions, together with their spatial distribution 
and variation
F The materials that make up the earth and its diverse land forms;
F The major economic activities of humans and the impacts on the 
environment.
Therefore, it is possible to conclude that although wide in its scope, geography 
has certain areas that it focuses upon.
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 9
1.2 The Scope Of Geography 1.3 Approaches In Geography
Content Check
1 Define: geography, spatial interaction, biosphere, and lithosphere.
2 What makes the scope of geography very wide?
3 What are the three questions that geographers ask when they study spatial 
distributions?
4 Challenge: Geography focuses on the inter-relationship between human 
beings and their environment. Can you explain the relationship? 
5 Geography’s concern is much more than the study of place names. Explain 
this statement briefly.
1.3 APPROACHES IN GEOGRAPHY
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ justify the merit and demerit of approaches used to study physical and 
human environments.
Key Terms
³ Approach 
³ Regional approach 
³ Systematic approach 
³ Region 
Brain-Storming
1 How do geographers study geography and geographic phenomena?
2 What are the methods and approaches that they employ? Discuss these 
questions with your friends.
Geographers, like other social scientists, have their own approaches to their 
subject. The most frequently adopted approaches are:
A Regional approach B Topical or systematic approach
Activity 1.3
What are the differences between the regional and systematic approaches? What are 
the weaknesses and strengths of each? Discuss these issue, with your desk mate.
Grade 11 Geography 10
1.3 Approaches In Geography
A Topical or Systematic Approach
Unlike the regional approach, the topical or systematic approach applies a 
specific geographical element or phenomenon over a defined geographical unit. 
For example, it takes a phenomenon such as climate, land forms or culture, and 
treats the distribution of the selected element over a country, continent or the 
world at large. 
In short, the topical approach seeks to establish general or common concepts of 
the phenomena studied, but only in terms of their relationships to distribution in 
an area.
Example:
F The geography of hunger
F The geography of climate
F The geography of agriculture
F The geography of population
B Regional Approach
A geographic study that uses the regional approach focuses on a region – a defined 
geographic unit or locality. Within the region, the study examines a variety of 
geographic features. The region studied could be a subcontinent, continent or a 
number of countries that share a common geographic factor.
Example: 
F The geography of Africa, Asia, or Oceania, etc
F The geography of sub-Sahara.
F The geography of the Middle East.
F The geography of the Balkans.
The similarity could be either physical (i.e., climate, landscapes, etc) or culturalanthropogenic (i.e., religion, language, economic activity, etc.). Regions vary 
NOTE 
A region is an area or spatial unit consisting of similar or 
homogeneous geographical features.
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 11
1.3 Approaches In Geography 1.4 Major School Of Thought In Geography
in area. The size of a region is a function of the study’s purpose. Regions called 
micro are relatively small, and those called macro are relatively large. 
Dividing the world into regions is a difficult task. However, we may construct a 
region on the basis of any one element or interrelated elements.
Focus
Geographical studies can be made with two different basic approaches. 
These are the Regional Approach and the Systematic (Topical) 
Approach. The REGIONAL approach studies the various characteristics 
of each region (realm) of the world. It divides the world into regions with 
each having its own distinct features that make it different from others. 
This approach then studies each geographic phenomenon in that region. 
SYSTEMATIC geography, on the other hand, studies one issue and looks 
at its spatial variations in all parts of the globe. Although geographers 
use these two basic approaches, they are not necessarily (regional and 
systematic), independent of each other. Instead, these approaches are 
interconnected and overlapping.
Content Check
1 What are the two approaches adopted in organizing geographical knowledge?
2 What are the differences between the systematic and regional approaches?
3 Are the two approaches independent of each other? Why or why not?
4 Which approach would best suit a study of the distribution of coffee 
cultivation in Ethiopia? Why?
1.4 MAJOR SCHOOL OF THOUGHT IN 
GEOGRAPHY
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ compare and contrast the concept of determinism with possibilism; 
Þ show appreciation for the significance of quantitative studies; 
Þ verify the importance of applied geography in solving social and 
environmental problems.
Grade 11 Geography 12
1.4 Major School Of Thought In Geography
Key Terms
³ School of thought 
³ Determinism 
³ Quantitative revolution
³ Applied geography 
³ Possibilism 
³ Environment 
Geography has gone through a series of changes and developments. The 1930’s, 
witnessed major radical changes in the discipline, and were turning points in the 
history of geography. 
The most prominent of these scholars were Alexander Von Humboldt and Karl 
Ritter. Various schools of thought have emerged with different views regarding the 
relationship between humans and their environment as well as the interpretation 
of social problems by human. Different schools of thoughts developed. The main 
schools are determinism and possibilism.
Since the mid 18th C, we have been observing these two dominant schools of 
thought that explain relationships between humans and their environment.
Historical Notes
Alexander Von Humboldt 
(1769 – 1859)
A German Geographer who traveled 
for 5 years in South America collecting 
data in order to identify relationships 
between the spatial distribution of rocks, 
plants and animals. He emphasized on 
the interdependence of peoples, plants 
and animals with one another within a 
specific physical setting. He then showed 
how people have to adapt to and affect 
their environment.
Sketch of Karl Ritter
(1779 – 1859)
He was the founder of the tradition of 
regional geography. His approach 
was to establish a framework 
for scientific comparisons and 
generalizations by dividing the 
continents into regions with distinct 
characteristics.
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 13
1.4 Major School Of Thought In Geography 1.4 Major School Of Thought In Geography
Activity 1.4
In a small group discuss how humans and the environment interact and try to answer 
the following questions.
1 Does the physical environment decide how people live? Why or why not?
2 Can humans adjust their environments in a way that suits their needs? How? 
A School of Determinism 
What is the basis of the philosophy of environmental determinism?
It was the dominant idea up to World War I. It advocated that the physical environment 
directs or is the master in determining the day-to-day activity of people. 
Environmental Determinism is a philosophy that bases its view on the idea that 
the natural environment is an influencing factor on humans’ mode of living. It 
believes that human activities are controlled by the environment.
It is based on the belief that the physical qualities of geographical conditions 
are the causes not only for people’s physical differences but also for differences 
from place to place in people’s economic activities, cultural practices and social 
structure. Environmental determinists thus tend to focus on the impact of the 
physical environment on people, rather than the reverse the influence of people 
on the environment. This view had strong influences on the geographic writings 
of the 19th century and its influence penetrated well into the 20th century.
The idea of environmental determinism was laid down by Greek and Roman 
scholars. They claimed that the elements of the physical environment such as 
climate, relief, soil and the like determine peoples mode of life. Many scientists 
agree that the publication of “The Origin of species” by Charles Darwin in 1859 
laid the foundation for the concept of the influence of the environment on people 
and other organisms. In the same way, Demolins (1901 and 1903) postulated that 
“the flourishment of society is based on the environment.” 
Furthermore, determinists consider human beings as passive agents where 
the physical factors determine their attitude and process of decision making. 
However, this outlook was strongly criticized by geographers who favored a new 
school of thought known as environmental possibilism. The prominent scholars 
who supported the school of determinism were: Charles Darwin, Demolins, F. 
Rutzel, etc. 
Grade 11 Geography 14
1.4 Major School Of Thought In Geography
Activity 1.5
1 Do you agree with the idea of environment conservation? Why or why not?
2 With your friends, discuss why the philosophy of environmental determinism 
was severely criticized by the proponents of environmental possibilism. 
B Environmental Possibilism 
What do you think of environmental possibilism is? How is it different from 
environmental determinism?
The school of possibilism was postulated by Febvre. His supporters argue that 
human beings are masters of the environment and they can judge their benefits. 
They argued that there are no necessities but only possibilities. 
Proponents of this view emphasize that two-way relationships exist between 
humans and the environment. They state that people can influence the environment 
to enhance their way of life.
These geographers agree that the environment can potentially affect people’s 
activities, but they believe that we can use our knowledge and skills to regulate 
these effects. According to possibilists, it is impossible to explain the difference 
between human society and the history of that society without referring to the 
influence of the environment. Nowadays, the school of possibilism is becoming 
widely accepted since it recognizes human’s ability to change its environment 
using the latest or better technologies.
Activity 1.6
In a small group, discuss what humans have done so far to modify environments in 
ways that enhance their ways of life. 
Example: Human beings have been using irrigation to turn barren lands of the 
deserts into agriculturally productive areas.
C The Quantitative Revolution
What was quantitative revolution? How did it affect the significance of 
geography?
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 15
1.4 Major School Of Thought In Geography 1.4 Major School Of Thought In Geography
The quantitative revolution was one of the four major changes in the history of 
geography. The other three were regional geography, environmental determinism 
and critical geography. 
For centuries, geography had been primarily a descriptive science that tried to 
describe how things are distributed on the earth’s surface. The subject focused 
mainly on the “where” of geographic features. In the early 1950s, however, socioeconomic, physical, and political features and processes are spatially organized 
and ecologically related. The outcomes created by them are evidenced for a given 
time and place. As a result, a more abstract, theoretical approach to geographical 
research has emerged, and the analytical method of inquiry evolved this new 
approach. Used rigorous mathematical formulae, borrowing from the physical 
sciences. This movement in geography is called the “Quantitative Revolution”, 
It began to affect geographers and major geography departments in universities. 
What are the contributions of the quantitative revolution to the development of 
geography?
The revolution was founded by geographers and statisticians in Europe and the 
United States. With the purpose of bringing ‘scientific thinking’ to geography, 
the quantitative revolution led to an increased use of statistical techniques. In 
particular, it emphasized multivariable analysis and the use of computers in 
geographical research. The methods adopted included various mathematical 
techniques that were more precise than the descriptive methods of regional 
geography.
The quantitative revolution was a response to the crisis in the 1950’s. The crisis 
was the result of the challenges that geography faced during late 1940’s and early 
1950’s. Some of the major challenges were:
F The shutting down of many geography departments and courses. for 
example, the geography program at Harvard University was abolished 
in 1948.
F The division between Human and Physical geography was continueddemanding the autonomous subject hood of Human geography. 
F Geography was seen as solely descriptive and unscientific. As some 
argued, there was no explanation of why processes or phenomena occur 
in geography.
F Geography was not useful for solving problems. Hence, it was seen as 
exclusively educational.
Grade 11 Geography 16
1.4 Major School Of Thought In Geography
F Questions regarding the nature of geography persisted, for example, it 
was unclear to some people whether geography was a science, an art, 
a humanities subject or a social science. 
The revolution introduced a rapid change in the methodologies used in 
geographical research. This change led to a shift from descriptive geography to 
empirical law-making geography. As a result, disagreement between scholars 
of different schools such as those who supported quantitative methods and those 
who favored the descriptive approach arose.
Some of the techniques that became central to geography during the quantitative 
revolution were:
F Descriptive statistics 
F Inferential statistics 
F Basic mathematical equations and models, such as gravity models
F Deterministic models e.g., Von Thünen’s and Weber’s location models 
F Statistical models, using concepts of probability
The analytical method of inquiry led to the development of logically acceptable 
generalizations about the spatial aspects of closely defined events under different 
natural and cultural conditions. Generalizations may take the form of tested 
hypotheses, models, or theories. 
Adoption of the analytical approach helped geography to become a more lawgiving science, and the conception of the discipline as an idiographic field of 
study became less acceptable. This process began in the 1980s.
D The Emergence of Applied Geography
What is Applied Geography? When did it appear as a school of thought? 
Geography has been used since human beings appeared on earth. Primitive 
human and his successors had a good knowledge of the geography of the things 
NOTE 
The quantitative revolution was driven by the development 
of the computer and its ability to rapidly process data. 
Quantitative geographers “went radical” and applied 
computers, statistics, and mathematical models to the 
study of geographers.
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 17
1.4 Major School Of Thought In Geography 1.5 The Relationship Between Geography And Other Disciplines
that they needed for survival. However, geographic knowledge had little chance 
of being used to solve geographic problems. 
Another major development occurred in the latter part of the 20th Century in 
geography. This development was the development of applied geography; 
geography became a science that we can use to solve socio-economic and political 
problems. 
Applied geography had its roots in the quantitative revolution. The emergence of 
applied geography increased the applicability of geographic knowledge. Today, 
many geographers work as urban planners, GIS analysts, environmentalists, 
cartographers, location analysts, transportation planners, developing-nations 
specialists, public-transportation planners, highway planners, university-facility 
planners, transportation logisticians, demographic analysts, etc. 
Content Check
1 What is environmental determinism? 
2 What is environmental possibilism?
3 What was the quantitative revolution?
4 What is applied geography?
5 Discuss the contributions of the quantitative revolution to the development 
of geography.
1.5 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GEOGRAPHY
AND OTHER DISCIPLINES
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ relate elements of geographical study with other fields of studies;
Þ explain the role of geography in connecting various fields of study.
NOTE 
Applied geography is the use of geographic analysis in 
private business, government, non-profit organizations 
etc. Applied geography solves problems and aids in 
decision making.
Grade 11 Geography 18
1.5 The Relationship Between Geography And Other Disciplines
Key Terms
³ Interdisciplinary 
³ Social sciences 
³ Natural sciences 
³ Interdependence 
Geography is an interdisciplinary subject. It has strong relationships with various 
disciplines in both the natural and the social sciences. For instance, human 
geography is highly linked with social sciences, while physical geography is 
related to the natural sciences. Knowledge and information in geography and the 
other sciences are interchangeable and interdependent.
Activity 1.7
What fields of study interrelate with geography? Discuss this question in your group. 
Please try to remember the lessons you have learned in Grades Nine and Ten.
As you might have noted, many academic disciplines are linked with geography. 
Among them are: biology, meteorology, geology, astronomy, economics, political 
science, history, demography, sociology, chemistry, and mathematics. 
Can you describe how each of the above disciplines relates to geography? How 
does each connect to geography’s specialized fields of study? 
As indicated earlier, geography is closely linked to the social and natural sciences. 
Geography shares facts with them and explains certain aspects of those sciences. 
Observe how geography relates to these other sciences:
Biology: is a science that deals with all forms of life, including their classification, 
physiology, chemistry, and interactions. As biogeography is the study of plant 
and animal distribution, it is linked with biology.
Meteorology: is the scientific study of the earth’s atmosphere, especially its 
patterns of climate and weather. Hence, it is related to the sub field of geography 
called climatology.
Geology: is the study of the internal composition of the earth. It examines the 
forces that change the earth’s structure. It also investigates the history of those 
changes. Geology is linked with such branches of geography as Geomorphology 
and soil geography.
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 19
1.5 The Relationship Between Geography And Other Disciplines 1.5 The Relationship Between Geography And Other Disciplines
Astronomy: is the scientific study of the universe, especially of the motions, 
positions, sizes, composition, and behavior of astronomical objects. Topics about 
the universe, in particular the solar system, that are taught in geography are 
borrowed from astronomy.
Economics: is the study of the production, distribution, and consumption of goods 
and services. As economic geography is concerned with economic activities, it is 
strongly related to this field.
Political Science: is the study of political organizations and institutions, especially 
governments. This discipline has strong connections with political geography.
History: is a systematic and organized study of the past socio-economic and 
political processes of human society. History helps us anticipate the future. As it 
is concerned with the past, it is strongly linked with historical geography.
Demography: is the study of human populations, including their size, growth, 
density, and distribution, and statistics regarding birth, marriage, disease, and 
death. The body of knowledge that we learn in population geography is somehow 
linked with the subject matter of demography.
Physics: is the study of matter and energy and the effects they have on each other. 
Sociology: is the study of the origin, development, and structure of human 
societies and the behavior of individual people and groups in society. It connects 
to cultural geography.
Mathematics: is the study of the relationships among numbers, shapes, and 
quantities. It uses signs, symbols, and proofs and includes arithmetic, algebra, 
calculus, geometry, and trigonometry. Mathematical geography is linked with 
this academic discipline.
Activity 1.8
In a small group, list some topics and concepts of geography that are related to the 
following disciplines:
i Geology
ii Demography
iii Economics
iv Political science 
Why do we say that geography is an interdisciplinary subject?
Grade 11 Geography 20
Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY
In this unit, we have described the nature of geography. We defined geography, 
discussed its scope, discussed its approaches, examined its major schools of 
thought and examined its relationship with other sciences. 
In summary:
Þ Geography is a systematic study of the spatial distribution of phenomena 
on the surface of the earth and of the two-way interaction between the 
natural and human environments.
Þ The scope of geography is very wide. It attempts to study many parts of the 
geosphere: the lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, anthroposphere 
and biosphere. 
Þ Geographical studies are conducted based on two basic approaches, 
regional geography and systematic geography. The first studies all aspects 
of phenomena found in a region, while the latter investigates a single 
phenomenon globally.
Þ Environmental determinism and environmental possibilism are the two 
dominant philosophies that geographers use when they examine the 
relationship between humans and their environment. 
Þ The philosophy of environmental determinism is related to the idea that 
the environment is the factor that determines peoples’ mode of living. In 
contrast, the possibilist philosophy emphasizes the two-way relationship 
between humans and the environment and the possibility for humans to 
change the environment.
Þ The emergence of the quantitative revolution in the 1950s and 1960s 
contributed a lot to the development of geography. It incorporated 
different statistical techniques in to geographical studies.
Þ The emergence of applied geography increased the practical applicability 
of geography. Applied geography solve, many different socio-economic 
and environmental problems.
Þ Geography is highly integrated with other disciplines. It shares a wide range 
of information with the social and natural sciences.
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 21
Unit Review
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 1
I True or False 
1 The fact that deserts can be turned into agriculturally productive areas 
through irrigation supports the philosophy of environmental possibilism.
2 Geography is less practical in today’s world than it was before.
3 According to the determinist approach, human cannot change or influence 
the environment.
4 Systematic geography is the study of the general characteristic of a region.
5 The facts and principles of the natural sciences can be applied in geography.
II Matching: match the items given in the box with the statements 
given below. 
6 An ardent supporter of environmental determinism.
7 An ardent supporter of environmental possibilism.
8 A nomethic or empirical law- making geography that occurred in the mid 
20th C.
9 A geographic school largely concerned with the structure of the ecological 
system and other social problems.
10 A geographic approach that emphasizes various aspects of a defined spatial 
unit.
11 A geographic approach that singles out one or two elements and treats the 
distribution globally.
12 A branch of geography that deals with the dynamic and static aspects of 
population.
13 A branch of geography that deals with boundary, communication and 
activities between countries in relation to political power.
A Quantitative revolution
B Febvre
C Alexander Von Humboldt
D Topical approach
E Regional approach
F Demography
G Political geography
H Applied geography
I Demolins 
Grade 11 Geography 22
Unit Review
III Multiple Choices 
14 A Greek philosopher who pioneered the definition of geography was: 
A Plato
B Erathosthenes
C Herodotus
D Pythagoras
15 Which of the following opinions do you accept? 
A The definition of geography is static.
B Geography is a discipline which does not have one single definition.
C Geography does not have any relationship with other disciplines.
D The definition of geography is not subject to any change.
16 Which of the following statements about geography is correct? 
A Physical phenomena are evenly distributed over the surface of the 
earth.
B There is a one-way relationship between humans and their 
environments.
C All elements in the natural environment affect the way of life of its 
inhabitants.
D Human beings are not capable of modifying their environments.
17 The main theme of possibilism is: 
A The two-way relationship between human and nature.
B Human beings are not capable of modifying their environments.
C Human society is a passive agent in the man-environment relationship.
D Human beings are always under the influence of their environment.
18 Which of the following reflects the deterministic outlook? 
A Self reliance.
B People who live in cold climates are stronger and more courageous 
than those living in warm climates.
C Human is capable of modifying his environment.
D Analyses social structure in terms of human activities.
IV Fill in the blank space. 
19 A German geographer who tried to show how people adapt to and are 
influenced by the environment was _________. 
Unit 1: The Science Of Geography 23
Unit Review
20 The sub field of geography that studies how plants and animals are 
distributed is called _________. 
21 Part of the exosphere that represents the cultural landscape of the earth is 
_________. 
22 A Greek scholar who coined the word ‘Geography’ for the first time was 
_________.
23 The use of geography for socio-economic and political problem solving 
and planning is know as _________. 
V Define the following terms.
a Lithosphere
b Troposphere
c Hydrosphere
d Biosphere
e Anthroposphere 
VI Answer the following questions briefly.
24 What is geography?
25 What is the difference between regional and systematic geography?
26 What is the difference between environmental possibilism and environmental 
determinism?
27 What is applied geography? What is the historical background for its 
emergence?
28 Discuss the relationship that exists between geography and the other social 
sciences.
29 What was the quantitative revolution in geography?
30 What is the geo-sphere?
31 What are the basic questions that geography addresses in the second half 
of the 20th C?
32 Geographers argue that “Geography is not solely the study of p