In the previous unit, you have learned about map reading and interpretation. 
There, issues related to relief representation on contour maps, representation of 
drainage on maps, human-made features on maps and the geographic information 
system were discussed. 
In this unit, you are going to learn about Africa. The unit will give you an overview 
of the location, size and shape of the continent and its regional divisions, its 
geological history and relief structure, and the continent’s climate and related 
issues. In addition, the drainage of Africa and its wildlife resources will be 
discussed. Also, the soil resources of the continent will be emphasized.
3.1 POSITION, SIZE AND SHAPE OF AFRICA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ demonstrate the relative and absolute location of Africa using world map;
Þ compare the size of Africa with other continents;
Þ discuss the impacts of the coastal and continental shape of Africa on its 
development;
Þ describe the regional division of Africa;
Þ show the geographical location of each region;
Þ relate the sub regions in terms of size, access to the sea and major relief 
structure; and
Þ analyze the socio-economic and geo-political similarities of each region.
Key Terms
³ Absolute location
³ Relative location 
³ Latitude 
³ Longitude
³ Area size 
³ Shape 
³ Region 
³ Epeirogenesis
Grade 11 Geography 102
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
3.1.1 Position of Africa
Brainstorming
1 What is location? How is it described? 
2 Where is Africa located? 
3 Can you state the relative and absolute locations of Africa?
Africa’s location can be expressed in two ways, namely, absolutely and relatively.
As you can see from Figure 3.1, Africa lies between 37o
21'N and 34o
52'S latitudes 
and between 17o
33'W and 51o
28'E longitudes. This means that the continent 
extends for about 37o
 to the north of the equator and 35o
 south of it. Similarly, 
Africa extends for about 17o
 west and 51o
 east of the Greenwich Meridian. From 
this absolute location, we can understand that the continent stretches in all the 
four hemispheres. 
Cape Verde 
(Senegal) 
17o33’W
Cape Bon (Tunisia) 
37o21’N
Cape Guardafui 
(Somalia) 
51o28’E
Cape Agulhas (RSA) 
34o52’S
Figure 3.1: Africa's Astronomical Location
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 103
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa 3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
The four extreme points of the continent, which mark the extreme points of Africa 
are the following.
F Extreme North - Cape Bon (Tunisia) -37o
21'N
F Extreme South - Cape Agulhas (Republic of South Africa (RSA)) - 
34o
52'S
F Extreme East - Cape Guardafui (Somalia) - 51o
28'E
F Extreme West - Cape Verde (Senegal) - 17o
33'W
Activity 3.1
In a small group, study Figure 3.1 and answer the following questions.
1 What unique features do you observe about Africa’s absolute location?
2 What impacts has Africa’s absolute location on its climate, natural vegetation, 
fauna, agriculture, and human settlements?
From the map that shows the absolute location of Africa, we can learn that:
F when we measure Africa’s greatest north-south and east-west extents, 
we find that they are almost equal:
K north-south – approximately 8000 kilometers 
K east-west – approximately 7,600 kilometers
F the equator crosses Africa almost at its north-south center. The northsouth extents above and below it are almost equal, although the 
northern area is greater than the southern one. The land area north of 
the equator is about twice that of the south. 
F Africa is the only continent crossed by all of the following: the Tropic of 
Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn, the Equator and the Prime Meridian. 
F almost ¾ of the continent's total area is found within the tropics, and 
therefore much of the continent experiences tropical climates.
When Africa’s position is expressed in relation to the major landmasses and water 
bodies that are close to it, it can be described as follows. Africa is found to the:
F South of Europe
F Southwest of Asia
F South of the Mediterranean Sea
F West of the Indian Ocean 
F East of the Atlantic Ocean 
F North of the Southern Ocean
Grade 11 Geography 104
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
Activity 3.2
1 By referring to Figure 3.2, describe the relative location of Africa in relation to 
the features mentioned above.
2 Where is Africa closest to:
a Europe? b Asia?
As the map shows, Africa gets closest to Europe across the Strait of Gibraltar, 
which is about 22 kms wide between Morocco and Spain. With relation to Asia, 
the continent comes closest across the Strait of Bab-el Mandab, which is about 
40 kms wide. A narrow stretch of land called the Isthmus of Suez, which is cut 
into two by an artificial canal called the Suez Canal, connects Africa with Asia.
Activity 3.3
Refer to the above Figure 3.2 and using an atlas perform the following activities.
1 Locate the Strait of Gibraltar, the Strait of Bab-el Mandab and the Isthmus of Suez.
2 Find the four extreme points of Africa.
The relative position that Africa has, in relation to the rest of the world, gives the 
continent many advantages. The following are the most important ones.
Figure 3.2: Africa's Relative Position in the world
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 105
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa 3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
F The continent occupies a central location in the world. This makes 
the continent close to the rest of the world, providing it geographical 
accessibility. 
F The geographical proximity that the continent has with Europe and 
Asia has resulted in socio-cultural contacts. This has encouraged 
socio-economic and cultural exchange and integration among the three 
continents.
3.1.2 Size of Africa 
Brainstorming
1 How large is Africa’s land area? 
2 What percentage of the world’s landmass is Africa’s?
Africa is the second largest continent in the world, following Asia. The continent’s 
total area is about 30,335,000 km2
. This constitutes 20.2% of the earth’s total 
land surface. With this area, the continent is about two-thirds of the size of Asia 
and 3.36 times larger than Europe. Table 3.1 indicates the sizes of the world’s 
continents. 
Table 3.1: Area of the Continents
Continent Area (000’ km2
) % of World Area
Africa 30,335 20.2
Asia 45,000 30.0
Europe 10,000 6.67
Australia and Oceania 8,700 5.8
N. America 24,200 16.14
South America 17,000 11.34
Antarctica 14,000 9.3
World total 149,900 100
Grade 11 Geography 106
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
Africa’s large area gives the continent several advantages, including the following:
F A large area of land that can be used for settlements, agriculture, and 
other economic activities.
F Huge resource potentials in terms of resources like soil, water, minerals, 
flora and fauna and the like, which are vital for its development. 
However, Africa’s large size also has disadvantages. For example, it makes 
geographical connectivity difficult among the people of the region and of the 
world. As a result, there are problems related to integration among peoples 
of the continent and others outside, making both integrated development and 
international trade a challenge. 
3.1.3 Shape of Africa
What is shape? What is its significance? 
How do you describe Africa’s shape? 
Shape is defined as the geographical form of an area. In other words, it is the 
external geographical appearance of a place. It has great impact on the socioeconomic integration and flow of goods and services within each region. 
The shapes of places can be described in different ways for example, as moderately 
compact, elongated, fragmented, perforated, and the like. A moderately compact 
shape is close to that of a circle. An elongated shape is a shape with one side 
longer than the other. A place with a fragmented shape is made up of multiple 
disconnected areas. For example, some countries are composed of islands.
Africa has a relatively compact shape. This means that the continent’s longest 
east-west and north-south distances are almost the same. The following evidence 
supports the above statement.
F The east-west and north-south extensions are almost equal, with a 
minor difference.
F Africa has a fairly unbroken coastline. The continent’s coastline does 
not have many indentations, inlets, bays or gulfs. This condition creates 
a relatively smooth coastline, compared to those of other continents, 
and therefore a relatively short one. For example, if we compare Africa 
and Europe, the coastline of the latter is, by far, longer than the former.
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 107
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa 3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
F The unbroken coastline of Africa makes the continent poor in natural 
harbors.
F Many places in Africa are not very far from the coast. Almost all places 
are at most located 1500 km from the coast. Therefore, many countries 
of the continent are not very far from the sea.
F The unbroken coast line discourages external communication. 
3.1.4 Regional Division of Africa
The mainland of Africa has five major regions. They are defined in terms of 
socio-economic and cultural similarities. Each region consists of a number of 
countries with their own regional variations. The regions are
F Eastern Africa
F Central Africa
F Northern Africa
F Southern Africa
F Western Africa 
The geographical location of these regions and their political units are given in 
the following figures. A brief description of the socio-economic conditions of 
each region is also made below the figures.
Study them carefully and try to identify each region’s relative location as well as 
the countries that constitute the region.
Northern
Western
Central
Eastern
Southern Figure 3.3: Regional division of 
Africa
Grade 11 Geography 108
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
Table 3.2: The regions of Africa
Name of 
region 
Area
(km²)
Population
(2009) 
Population Density
(per km²)
Number of 
Countries
Eastern Africa 6,384,904 316,053,651 49.5 18
Central Africa 6,613,253 121,585,754 18.4 9
Northern Africa 8,533,021 211,087,622 24.7 11
Southern Africa 2,693,418 56,406,762 20.9 5
Western Africa 6,144,013 296,186,492 48.2 17
Africa Total 30,368,609 1,001,320,281 33.0 61
N.B: The total number of countries and the total area given in the above table 
include the insular/island states of Africa and their area.
As shown in Table 3.2, Northern Africa is the largest in terms of its territorial 
size followed by Central and Eastern Africa. In terms of population size, Eastern 
Africa is the most populous followed by Western and Northern Africa. Likewise, 
SOUTH AFRICA
LESOTHO
SWAZILAND
MOZAMBIQUE ZIMBABWE
BOTSWANA
NAMIBIA
ANGOLA
MADAGASCAR
COMOROS
MALAWI
TANZANIA
BURUNDI
CONGO
CAMEROON
NIGERIA BENIN
BURKINA 
FASO
NIGER
MALI
GHANA
COTE’ 
D’IVOIRE
LIBERIA
GUINEA
SIERRA LEONE
GUINEA 
BISSAU
GAMBIA
SENEGAL
MAURITANIA
WESTERN 
SAHARA
MOROCCO
ALGERIA
TUNISIA
MALTA
LIBYA
ARABIA
JAMAHIRIYA EGYPT
CHAD SUDAN ERITREA
SAUDI ARABIA
ETHIOPIA
DJIBOUTI
YEMEN
TOGO
CENTRAL 
AFRICAN 
REPUBLIC
UGANDA KENYA
SOMALIA
GABON
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
ASCENSION U.K.
DEMOCRATIC RWANDA REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO
ZAMBIA
Figure 3.4: Political Map of Africa
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 109
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa 3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
there are significant differences in the population densities of the various regions. 
Eastern Africa has the largest population density 49.5 people per km2
 followed 
by Western Africa. Central Africa has the continent’s lowest population density, 
18.4 people per km2
.
The following discussion provides you with a brief description of the Socioeconomic conditions of the regions of Africa.
Eastern Africa
Eastern Africa is the region that is located between 18o
N – 27o
S latitudes and 
22o
E – 51o
28'E longitudes. The region is the third largest in terms of its area 
accounting for about 21% of the continent’s total area . A total of 18 countries, of 
which seven are landlocked, constitute the region. The physiographic of eastern 
Africa is characterized by diverse relief. Very high volcanic mountains, extensive 
plateaus, great rift valleys and low depressions dominate the region’s topography. 
Such diversity in surface configuration has resulted in the presence of diverse 
climate that ranges from desert and semi-desert type to high altitude alpine 
climate. This, in turn, has helped the development of varied vegetation zones 
of tropical grasslands, forests, alpine vegetations and desert and semi-desert 
vegetations making the region rich in flora and fauna resources. Eastern Africa 
is drained by the Nile, Wabishebelle and Genale river basins. It is also the region 
where most of Africa’s highland and rift valley lakes are found.
In terms of population, Eastern Africa is the most populous of all the regions 
accounting for about 31.3% of Africa’s total population in 2009. Nearly 22% of 
the region’s population is urban. Life expectancy averages 51 years. Agriculture 
is the most dominant economic activity in the region. Commercial cash crops 
such as coffee, tea, sisal, and sugar cane, are the most important agricultural 
products. Livestock resources are also important sources of income. The mining 
and industrial sectors are little developed in the region.
Northern Africa
Northern Africa is the largest region in terms of area. It covers nearly 1/3rd of 
the continent’s total area. There are seven countries in the region, two of which 
namely Sudan and Algeria are among the largest states in Africa. All the states 
of this region have direct access to the sea. Northern Africa is characterized by 
desert climate. In addition, the Mediterranean type of climate also dominates the 
Maghreb region. The region’s topography is dominated by mountains and plains. 
Grade 11 Geography 110
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
The Atlas Mountains and the Sahara Basin and uplands are the most common 
features. Much of Northern Africa is covered by desert vegetation. However, 
Mediterranean vegetation is also found in areas where Mediterranean climate 
dominates. 
In 2009, the population of northern Africa accounted for about 20.5% of 
Africa’s total population. Nearly 50% of the region’s population is urban and life 
expectancy averages 69 years. The Economy of northern Africa is dominated by 
agriculture, industry and mining.
Western Africa
The region of Western Africa is stretched between 4o
N – 25o
N latitudes and 
17o
33'W – 16o
E longitudes. Accounting for about 20% of Africa’s total area, 
a total of 17 countries constitute the region. Highlands and lowlands make up 
a good part of the relief of Western Africa. The Guinea highlands, the Fouta 
Djalon and Jos plateau form higher parts of the region. The Niger, Benue, Volta, 
Gambia and Senegal rivers drain the region. The climate of the region shows 
great variation, while the western coasts experience tropical humid climates with 
very high rainfall and temperature, the interior lowlands are characterized by 
low rainfall and high temperature. These climatic conditions have resulted in the 
presence of diverse vegetation that includes tropical forests, tropical woodlands 
and grasslands. 
Western Africa is the second most populous region in the continent. In 2009 the 
region accounted for about 29.7% of the total population of Africa. Africa’s most 
populous country, Nigeria, is found in this region. About 42% of the region’s 
population lives in urban areas and life expectancy averages 51 years.
The economy of Western Africa is dominated by agriculture. Coffee, Cacao, 
Palm oil, rubber and ground nuts are among the most important agricultural cash 
crops produced in the region. Industrial development is limited to coastal areas. 
In some countries like Nigeria, Ghana and Guinea, mining is the most important 
economic activity.
Central Africa
Central Africa is located between 23o
30'N – 15o
30'S and 8o
E – 32o
E. Covering 
about 22% of Africa’s total area and possessing 9 countries, Central Africa is the 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 111
3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa 3.1 Position, Size And Shape Of Africa
second largest region in Africa. A good part of Central Africa, nearly 2/3rd of the 
region, is a vast depression that is drained by the Congo basin. Highland areas in 
the region include the Cameroon mountains and Ruwenzori Range. 
Central Africa experiences almost all types of climates of the content, except the 
Mediterranean type. Equatorial, tropical savanna, mountain (highland) and desert 
climates are among the most dominant ones. The diverse climatic conditions of the 
region make Central Africa rich in bio-diversity. Equatorial rainforests, Savanna 
woodland, Gallery(Riverine) vegetation, Desert and semi-desert vegetation are 
among the most common vegetation covers of the region.
Central Africa accounts for about 12.5% of the total population of Africa. The 
region is characterized by low population density due to its climatic conditions. 
41% of the region’s population is urban. The average life expectancy in Central 
Africa is about 51 years.
Agriculture, forestry, mining and manufacturing constituted a good part of 
Central Africa’s economy. However, the dominant economic sector that supports 
the lives of the majority of the population in the region is subsistence agriculture. 
Central Africa has huge potential for commercial crop production. The region 
owns about 30% of Africa’s tropical woods. The region also has large reserves 
of different types of minerals such as copper, zinc, aluminum, diamond, gold, 
and oil. A number of oil refineries and timber processing plants are found in 
the region. Angola, Gabon and Cameroon are the richest countries in petroleum 
resources in the region.
Southern Africa
The absolute location of Southern Africa is between 18o
S – 34o
52'S and 7o
E – 
32o
E. The region is divided into five sovereign states. Accounting for about 8.9% 
of Africa’s total area, Southern Africa is the smallest region in the continent. 
The topography of Southern Africa is dominated by high plateaus of over 
300 m high. Among the highest areas in the region are the Drakensberg mountains. 
The region is drained by major river basins that include the Limpopo, Orange, 
and Vaal. There are also major inland basins in the region including the NgamiKalhari, Makarikari and Okovango basins. 
The climate of Southern Africa is highly diverse. There are tropical, desert, alpine 
and Mediterranean climates. The Mozambique and Benguela currents produce 
Grade 11 Geography 112
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
greater impact on the climate of the east and west coast of the region, respectively. 
As a result of the diverse climate, the region is endowed with different species of 
flora and fauna. 
Accounting for about 5.8% of Africa’s total population, Southern Africa is the 
least populous in the continent. Nearly 56% of the regions population resides in 
urban areas and the region’s life expectancy averages 52 years. 
Southern Africa has the most diverse economy in the continent. Agriculture, 
mining, manufacturing and tourism form the major occupation of the region’s 
population. Agriculture in the region is highly mechanized and comercialized. 
The region is also rich in terms of mineral resources. Gold, diamond, and coal 
are among the most important ones. The region has most of the major mining and 
manufacturing industries in the continent. 
Content Check
Fill in the blank spaces.
1 The exact location of a place that is expressed by using latitudes and 
longitudes is know as ________.
2 The two water bodies that are connected by the straight of Bab-el-Mandeb 
are ________ and ________.
3 Africa’s shape can be described as ________.
4 The most populous region of Africa is ________
5 The Northern and Southern extreme points of Africa are ________ and 
________, respectively.
3.2 GEOLOGICAL HISTORY AND RELIEF 
STRUCTURE OF AFRICA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ reconstruct the geological history of Africa;
Þ identify major relief structures of Africa on a map; 
Þ appreciate the unique relief features of Africa; and
Þ compare the relief of Africa with other continents.
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 113
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa 3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
Key Terms
³ Geological history
³ Geological time scale
³ Orogenesis 
³ Denudation 
³ Peneplanation
³ Basement complex
³ Fluvial rains 
³ Relief 
³ Rift valley
3.2.1 Geological History of Africa
Brainstorming
1 What is geology? 
2 What does geological history mean? 
3 How do geologists study the earth’s past? 
4 Do you know the major geologic events that took place in Africa? 
5 How did they affect the present surface structure of the continent?
The present relief structure of Africa is the result of long, complex and continuous 
processes that have taken place for several millennia. 
In this lesson, we will consider the geological history of Africa. Throughout 
the 4.5 billion year history of the planet, several geologic processes acted on 
the planet and formed its relief. In this process, Africa underwent several major 
geological events and changes.
The continent of Africa was part of the old continent that we call Pangea. In the 
Jurassic period of the Mesozoic era, some 200 million years ago Pangea broke into 
two, forming Laurasia and Gondwanaland. Laurasia was the northern continent, 
and Gondwanaland was the southern. Africa was part of Gondwanaland. As time 
passed, each of these continents was further broken down, forming the seven 
present-day continents. 
In this process of change, the planet experienced several geologic events that 
resulted in the formation of the world’s present surface structure. In Africa, major 
geologic events and processes acted on the continent’s surface and left their scars, 
forming the continent’s diverse relief. 
Now let us see the major events that took place in the African continent in each era. 
Grade 11 Geography 114
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
Activity 3.4
In a small group, discuss to answer the following questions.
1 What were the major geologic events that took place in the Pre-Cambrian era 
in Africa?
2 What were the major geologic events that took place in the Paleozoic era in 
Africa?
3 Identify the major geologic processes that took place in the Mesozoic and 
Cenozoic eras in Africa.
Precambrian Era (4.5 billion - 600 million years before the 
present)
This era is the oldest and largest division of the geological time scale. It covers 
almost 5/6th of the geological history of the planet. Due to its remoteness in time 
and lack of fossil evidences, not much is known about this era. However, two 
processes are believed to have been dominant. These are orogenesis (a series of 
mountain-forming processes) and metamorphism. 
For Africa, the following events are assumed to have been dominant in this era. 
F Formation of the Basement Complex Rocks: the oldest rocks of 
the continent, which are called Precambrian or crystalline basement 
complex rocks, were formed during this era. These rocks cover nearly 
two-thirds of the continent. Precambrian rocks are rich in metallic 
mineral deposits, such as gold and copper. 
F Orogenesis: is a mountain-forming process. In this era, many mountains 
that make the face of the continent very rough and undulating, were formed. 
Focus 
Orogenesis (mountain building): changes in the level of the earth’s 
crust in which rocks are thrown up into folds or blocks to form ranges of 
mountains. In course of time, the mountains may be considerably denuded 
and may there after be depressed or elevated by Epeirogenesis. 
Paleozoic Era (600 - 250 million years before the present)
This is the second-longest and second-oldest era in geological history. This era 
witnessed no major rock formation processes. As a result, it is a gap, relative to 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 115
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa 3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
rock formation in Africa. However, several other important events took place 
during this era. The following are the most important ones.
F Series of denudation and peneplanation: during this era, internal and 
external forces acted on the face of Africa, resulting in denudation and 
peneplanation of its surface. Denudation is the lowering of the earth’s 
surface, while sinking of land and its resultant peneplanation refers to 
the formation of almost level surfaces as a result of lowering in altitude. 
F Heavy erosion: the denudation and peneplanation processes were 
facilitated by the heavy erosion that affected many places in Africa. 
The eroded materials accumulated in the Maghreb region, the western 
Sahara, and the Southern Cape. From Eastern Africa, sediments were 
taken to Southern Africa and the Middle East. These sediments finally 
formed sandstones, shale and limestone. Also during this era, fold 
mountains that run parallel to the Great Karroo, the interior plateau, 
formed. 
F Formation of coal during the Carboniferous period.
Focus 
Carboniferous period: The coal Age: is that part of the Paleozoic Era 
when coal was extensively formed. Thick layers of partially decayed 
swamp vegetation, covering coastal lowlands were buried under marine 
deposits when the coastal lands sank. More swamps were formed when 
the water grew shallower and the process was repeated. As the deposits 
became compressed and hardened, the vegetation matter formed coal. 
Mesozoic Era (250-70 million years before the present)
The Mesozoic era is the third-largest and third-oldest era in the geological history 
of the earth. For Africa, the era was a time of alternate sinking and rising of the 
land. The era is divided into three periods. These are the Triassic, Jurassic and 
Cretaceous. During the first period, the Triassic, there was sinking of the land 
in the eastern part of the continent. The land remained under the sea during the 
Jurassic period. Rising (uplifting) of the land began in the Cretaceous. 
The following are the most important events that took place during the Mesozoic 
era in Africa. 
F Sinking of the Horn of Africa resulted in the gradual transgression of 
the sea during the early years of the Triassic period;
Grade 11 Geography 116
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
F Formation of sedimentary rocks like those in eastern Africa, which were 
the results of the alternate sinking and rising of the land;
F Uplifting of the land in the Horn of Africa, resulted in the regression of 
the sea during the Cretaceous period;
F The flooding of the Sahara region, by water that advanced from Tathys (a 
sea that separated Laurasia from Gondwanaland), and the subsequent 
accumulation of sediments.
Cenozoic Era (70 million - present)
This era is the most recent and the shortest era in the geological history of the 
earth. It covers the time from 70 million years ago to the present. As a result, the 
era is sometimes called the living era. There are two periods in this era. These are 
the Tertiary and Quaternary periods. A number of geologic events that changed 
the face of the continent took place in this era. The major geologic events of this 
era are the following.
F Formation of the Mediterranean Sea, the Great East African Rift Valley, 
the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden.
F Formation of many of the volcanic mountains, plateaus and young fold 
mountains (Atlas Folds) of Africa. The volcanic mountains that shape 
the landscape in eastern Africa were formed during this era. 
F Climatic change that resulted in the cooling and later warming of 
the earth’s climate. The cooling of the climate resulted in the Pluvial 
(Fluvial) rains in tropical Africa, which caused heavy erosion in many 
parts of the continent. Later, warming of the climate resulted in heavy 
evaporation and drying up of many water surfaces. In some instances, 
such a change resulted in the formation of extensive salt plains like the 
one in northeastern Ethiopia (Afar).
NOTE 
The Cenozoic Era is responsible for the formation of the 
present surface configuration of the African continent. 
The present shape, position and relief of Africa was formed 
during this era. The very high volcanic mountains, the 
extensive plateaus, the plains and drainage basins of Africa 
were all formed as a result of the series of geologic events 
of this era. 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 117
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa 3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
The various geological events and processes that took place in the four major 
eras of the geological time scale have affected the African landmass. The diverse 
landscapes that we see today in Africa are the results of these processes. Table 3.3 
gives a summary of the major geologic events that took place in Africa during the 
four eras and during their periods and epochs.
Table 3.3: Summary of the Geological History of Africa
Era Period Epoch Geologic Events in Africa Cenozoic 
Quaternary 
Recent 
Pleistocene 
River terraces and raised beaches formed glaciations 
in Eastern African mountains; down- warping of the 
Chad basin; heavy deposition in basins such as the 
Kalahari basin. 
Tertiary 
Pliocene Mountain building (for example, the Atlas 
Mountains); intense volcanic eruption in East Africa. 
Miocene 
Oligocene East African Rift Valley developed; extensive lava 
flows in Ethiopia Eocene 
Mesozoic 
Cretaceous Marine sediments deposited in many areas, e.g., 
southern Nigeria. 
Jurassic Mountain ranges uplifted, e.g., Cape Mountains.
Triassic 
Paleozoic 
Permian Central and Southern Africa in grip of ice age .
Carboniferous 
Devonian 
Silurian 
Ordovician 
Cambrian Ice age in parts of Northern Africa. 
Pre- Cambrian 
Mountain building; oldest rocks (4 billion years) in 
Southern Africa. 
Grade 11 Geography 118
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
3.2.2 The Relief Structure of Africa
What is relief? How do you describe the relief of Africa? 
Africa's relief is made up of huge mountains, extensive plateaus, deep valleys and 
gorges, plains, and the like. However, much of Africa is plateau. The continent's 
relief consists of 71% plateaus, 25% plains and 4% mountains. Africa is the only 
continent that is predominantly covered by plateau lands, and that has only a 
small proportion of plains. 
The relief of Africa ranges from 5,895 m above sea level (at Mt. Kilimanjaro in 
Tanzania) to 132 m below sea level (at the Qattara Depression in Egypt). This 
makes the maximum relief of Africa to be 6027 m. The plateau nature of Africa 
can be seen in the Table 3.4. 
Table 3.4: Percentage distribution of major landforms of the earth, by continent
Continent Landform Types (%)
Mountains and Hills Plateaus Plains
Africa 4 71 25
Asia 44 24 32
Europe 25 8 67
North America 24 24 52
South America 20 24 56
Oceania 28 24 48
As the Table 3.4 indicates, much of Africa is composed of plateau landscape. In 
contrast to the rest of the continents of the world, Africa has the greatest part of 
Low plateaus
Atlas Ranges
Drakensberg Mts
East African 
Rift vallwy East African Highlands
High plateaus
N.B: Yellow color represents 
lower altitude while the 
gray color shows extremely 
higher altitude and the 
green color shows areas of 
high altitude. 
Figure 3.5: The Topography of Africa
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 119
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa 3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
its relief as plateau. However, other features also dominate the continent. These 
are mountains, plains and the Rift Valley. Now, we shall discuss each of these 
relief features.
Focus
Maximum relief is the difference in altitude between the highest and 
lowest points of a place.
Plateaus
What is Plateau? 
In most parts of Africa, areas above 300 m above sea level altitude are considered 
to be plateaus. Their altitude reaches its maximum in Eastern Africa, and the 
Ethiopian plateaus reach over 2000 m above sea level. 
Africa's average altitude, 700 m, is a dividing line for plateau types. The continent’s 
landmass can broadly be divided into two types of plateaus high plateau and low 
plateau. 
High plateaus: are extensive plateaus that lie above 700 m, and their general 
elevation is above 2000 m. They are found in southern and eastern Africa. The 
East African plateau, the Bihe (Bie') plateau, the Southwest African highlands 
and the Malagacy highlands are included in this group. The Kalahari in the west 
and the Great Karoo in the south are the two major basins in this plateau. 
Low Plateaus: lie between 300 and 700 m above sea level. The northern and 
western parts of Africa are predominantly areas of low plateau. As they are 
surrounded by high plateaus, they form inland basins, such as the Chad, Libyan 
and Sudd basins. The surrounding uplands of the low plateaus include the Fouta 
Djalon Mountains, the Jos plateau (Bouchi plateau), the Adamawa uplands, the 
Ahagar Mountains, the Tibesti and Red Sea hills. 
Mountains
What is a Mountain? Where are most of the Mountains of Africa found? 
A mountain is a high land with steep slopes and a peak. Africa’s landform is 
dominated by two major types of mountains. These are volcanic and fold 
mountains. 
Grade 11 Geography 120
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
Volcanic mountains: were formed as a result of the great volcanic activities that 
took place in the Tertiary period of the Cenozoic era. They constitute the highest 
points (peaks) of the continent, with many of them being above 4,000 m above 
sea level. Many of the volcanic mountains of the continent are concentrated in 
Eastern Africa. Table 3.5 shows you the major volcanic mountains of the continent 
with their heights and locations. 
Table 3.5: Volcanic Mountains of Africa
Mountain Elevation (m) Location
Killimanjaro 5895 Tanzania
Kenya 5200 Kenya
Ras Dejene/Dashen 4620 Ethiopia
Meru 4567 Tanzania
Elgon 4321 Uganda and Kenya border
Cameroon 4070 Cameroon
N.B. Mount Ruwenzori (5119 m) is among the highest mountains in Africa the formation of which 
was associated with tectonic movement.
Fold Mountains: are found in the northern and southern extremes of Africa. 
They are of two types: young and old. The young fold mountains are located 
in northwestern Africa, particularly in the Maghreb region, a region that covers 
areas in Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia. They are called the Atlas Mountains. 
These mountains are contemporary to the Alps of Europe and the Himalayas of 
Asia, and they were formed during the Alpine orogenesis during the Cenozoic 
era. Their general elevation declines from west to east. The old fold mountains
are found in South Africa. They were formed during the Hercynian orogeny in 
the Mesozoic era. They are contemporary to the Australian Alps. They are called 
the Cape Ranges. 
Focus
Fold mountains are formed as a result of compressional forces. When the 
earth’s crust is compressed due to horizontally moving surface, the land 
between two places will be forced to bend up wards and forming fold 
mountains as a result.
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 121
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa 3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
Plains
Plains are areas of low relief with more or less flat surface configurations. In 
Africa, places that lie below 300 m above sea level are generally considered plains. 
Plains are confined to the coastal areas of eastern, northeastern, southeastern and 
western Africa. They are very narrow structures that account for about 25% of 
Africa's relief. They are very small in size, hot dry, poorly vegetated and sparsely 
inhabited. In addition, their shores, are smooth and regular, and therefore without 
large bays or gulfs. As a result, the continent lacks good natural harbors.
Cape Ranges
Atlas Fold Mountains
Mount Kenya
Mount Elgon
Mount Maru
Mount Killimanjaro
Mount Ras Dashen
Air Tibesti
Mount Cameroon
Figure 3.6: The Location of Mountains 
in Africa
Figure 3.7: Cross-section of Africa
Grade 11 Geography 122
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
The Great East African Rift Valley
What is a rift valley? How do you describe the Great East African Rift Valley?
The East African Rift Valley is part of the world’s Great Rift Valley 
system, which stretches from Syria, in the Middle East, to Mozambique, 
in Southeastern Africa, over a distance of about 7,200 km. It was formed 
in the Tertiary period as a result of faulting processes that acted on the crust 
of the earth in the region. This rift system extends a distance of about 
5600 km in Africa, touching 15 countries in the continent. The Rift Valley has 
four trenches (branches). These are:
F Ethio-Eritrea-Djibouti-Northern Somalia Branch
F Western Branch
F Eastern (Gregory) Branch
F Malawi Rift Valley
Ethio-Eritrea-Djibouti-Northern Somalia Branch 
As the name itself implies, this branch runs through the four countries of the 
Horn of Africa. It is the northern most part of the African Rift Valley, extending 
north from Lake Turkana in Kenya. It branches out into three trenches at the Afar 
Triangle, forming the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden. It has many lakes, including 
Ethiopian Rift Valley lakes like Lakes Hawassa, Langano, Shalla, Abijata, and 
Ziway. 
NOTE 
The topography of Africa features a series of relatively 
flat plateaus and saucer-shaped basins, broken by 
highlands, mountain ranges, and valleys. Northern 
and western Africa, widely known as Low Africa, has 
much lower mean elevations than the south and east, 
that is often called High Africa. As a result, while the 
northern and western plateaus area are called low 
plateau, the eastern and southern parts are called 
high plateau. 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 123
3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa 3.2 Geological History And Relief Structure Of Africa
Western Branch 
This part of the Rift Valley runs from Uganda in the north, southwards through 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi to Tanzania. This 
part of the Rift Valley hosts the continent's highest block (horst) mountain, Mount 
Ruwenzori, and also lakes such as Lake Edward, Kivu and Tanganyika. 
Eastern (Gregory) Branch 
It runs from Lake Turkana in northern Kenya, crossing Tanzania to the east of 
Lake Victoria. Lakes such as Turkana, Naivasha, Norton, Manyari and Eyasi are 
located in it. 
Malawi Rift Valley 
This part of the Rift Valley exists where 
the Western and Eastern Branches 
converge. It runs through Tanzania and 
Mozambique, and ends at port Biera of 
Mozambique. Lakes Malawi, Rukuwa 
and Chilwa are among the major lakes 
in this part of the system. 
Focus
The Great Rift Valley is a geologic depression that extends from Syria 
in southwestern Asia to Mozambique in southeastern Africa. It takes the 
form of a series of valleys and bodies of water that are bounded by parallel 
fault lines. The Great Rift Valley is widening ,slowly but surely, and in the 
process is causing many volcanic eruptions and earthquakes in the area.
Afar Triangle
Figure 3.8: The East African Rift Valley
Grade 11 Geography 124
3.3 Climate Of Africa
Africa's largest lake, Lake Victoria (83,000 km2
) is found trapped between the 
western and eastern trenches of the Rift Valley. 
The following are the major characteristics of the East African Rift Valley: 
F It is bounded by steep escarpments (edges);
F It has numerous active and dormant volcanoes; 
F It is often affected by earth tremors like earthquakes, volcanism and 
landslides, making the Rift Valley very unstable; 
F Has a hot and dry climate in its many parts, making the place difficult 
for human habitation;
F Many structural basins (lakes) occupy the floor of the Rift Valley.
Activity 3.5
In a small group, discuss the major characteristics that distinguish the East African Rift 
Valley region from the rest of Africa.
Content Check
Give short and precise answers for the following questions
1 What is the geologic time scale?
2 Write five geologic events that took place in the Cenozoic era in Africa.
3 Where do we have the high plateaus of Africa?
4 Which areas of Africa are dominated by fold mountains?
5 Describe the great East African Rift Valley.
3.3 CLIMATE OF AFRICA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ review the elements of weather and climate;
Þ identify the major climatic controls of Africa;
Þ describe the seasonal temperature conditions of Africa;
Þ explain the seasonal distribution of rainfall in Africa;
Þ locate the climatic regions of Africa;
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 125
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.3 Climate Of Africa
Þ compare and contrast the different climatic regions of Africa;
Þ relate climatic data with the different climatic regions of Africa;
Þ explain the causes and consequences of drought in Africa; and
Þ locate drought-prone areas of Africa.
Key Terms
³ Weather
³ Climate
³ Climatic region
³ Controls of climate
³ Elements of climate
³ Drought 
³ Famine 
³ Sahel 
Activity 3.6
Discuss the following questions.
1 What do we mean by climate?
2 What constitutes the climate of a certain place?
3 Why do different places have different climates?
4 How do you describe the climate of Africa?
3.3.1 Controls of Weather and Climate in 
Africa
Brainstorming
1 Do all places in Africa have the same climatic conditions? Why or why not? 
2 What are the factors that affect the nature of the atmosphere in a certain place? 
3 Which of these factors, do you think, are the most important ones in Africa? 
Why?
Africa has varied climatic conditions. Why are there varied climates in Africa? 
The answer is that the variation in the climatic conditions of the different places 
in Africa is due to the intervention of weather and climate controls. The most 
Grade 11 Geography 126
3.3 Climate Of Africa
important factors that are responsible for this variation include latitude, altitude, 
distance from the sea, mountain barriers, ocean currents and major planetary 
winds and pressure belts. These factors are called climate controls because they 
regulate the conditions of the elements to produce different weather and climatic 
conditions. They are discussed below in detail. 
Latitude 
What is latitude? How does it affect the climate of Africa?
Latitudes indicate the distance places have from the equator. A place’s latitudinal 
location affects the amount of incoming solar radiation the place receives, and 
thereby its temperature. As we discussed earlier, much of Africa (nearly 2/3rd) 
lies within the tropical latitudes. Hence, the continent receives high sun angles 
throughout the year. Due to its latitudes, Africa is the hottest of all the continents. 
Altitude
What is altitude? How does it affect the conditions of temperature and rainfall 
in Africa?
Much of Africa is plateau. There are also high mountains in many parts of the 
continent, especially in Eastern Africa. These plateaus and mountains have great 
impacts on the continent’s climate. 
The plateaus and high mountains reduce maritime influence. This condition 
reduces temperature. For instance, Eastern Africa, despite its closeness to the 
equator, experiences highland climates. Similarly, the Atlas Mountains of North 
Africa and the Cape Ranges of South Africa experience the coldest temperatures 
in the continent. There are several reasons for this. One of the reasons that 
temperature is low in higher altitudes is that the air is very thin. This reduces the 
temperature-retention capacity of the air. The other reason is that, when air rises, 
it cools. 
The third factor is the fact that the atmosphere is heated from below (by the 
earth) directly, not by the sun. These are some of the factors why we feel colder 
at mountain tops than in valley bottoms. 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 127
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.3 Climate Of Africa
Focus
In Africa, the impact of altitude on climate is highly pronounced in the 
areas of the Atlas mountains, the Cape Range-Fold Mountains, and the 
extensive East African Highlands.
Distance from the Sea
How do you describe the impacts of the Sea on the climate of Africa?
Water bodies that are adjacent to land masses have great impacts on the temperature 
and rainfall conditions of those places. Africa in its northern part is very wide. 
This makes much of the area far from the sea. In addition, the extensive plateaus 
of Africa, which almost reach the coast with steep edges, form barriers greatly 
reducing the influence of the sea. Furthermore, the continent’s relatively straight 
and smooth coastline also reduces the impact of the sea in the interior areas. 
As a result, many parts of interior Africa experience continental climates with 
insignificance maritime influence.
Ocean Currents
What is Ocean Current? Which ocean currents affect the climate of Africa?
Oceanic water moves in two dimensions, vertically and horizontally. The 
horizontal movement of oceanic water is called ocean current. Based on their 
origin, ocean currents are of two types. These are warm and cold. Warm ocean 
currents have high temperatures and high moisture content, and therefore they 
have warming effect. They also tend to bring moisture to the coastal areas. 
In contrast, cold ocean currents have cool temperatures and low moisture content. 
Therefore, they have cooling effects on the areas that they blow over. They also 
bring no rain to adjacent areas, making places over which they blow very dry and 
desert. 
Three major ocean currents affect the African continent. These are the Canary 
Cold Current, the Benguela Cold Current and the Mozambique Warm 
Current. The first two make the northwestern and southwestern parts of Africa 
both cool and dry. On the other hand, the Mozambique warm ocean current makes 
Southeastern Africa warm and wet.
Grade 11 Geography 128
3.3 Climate Of Africa
Major Planetary Winds and Atmospheric Pressure
What is wind? What about atmospheric pressure?
What are the major winds and pressure systems that affect Africa?
Most of Africa lies within the tropics. Hence, much of it lies within the tradewind belts. The southeast trades and northeast trades dominate the climate of 
tropical Africa. The westerly winds from the subpolar high-pressure belts of the 
world reach the southern and northern tips of the continent. The Guinea monsoon 
winds (equatorial westerlies) also have significant impacts on the climate of 
equatorial Africa.
Of the global pressure belts, the subtropical highs (around 30o
N and S) and 
equatorial lows (doldrums) (between 5o
N and 5o
S latitudes) are the main pressure 
belts that affect the climate of the continent. In addition, the Inter Tropical 
Convergence Zone (ITCZ), which is the zone of convergence between the trade 
winds, regulates the winds that blow into Africa at different seasons. The ITCZ 
moves between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, following the overhead sun, 
pulling winds towards it. Hence, it controls the distribution of rainfall in Africa.
Canary Cold 
Current
Benguela Cold 
Current
Mozambique 
Warm Current
Figure 3.9: The major ocean currents affecting the 
climate of Africa
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 129
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.3 Climate Of Africa
Activity 3.7
1 In a small group, discuss the following questions.
a How do the ocean currents that blow over the coastal areas of Africa 
affect its climate?
b Identify the global winds that blow over Africa and explain how they 
influence the continent’s climate.
c What is the ITCZ? How does it influence the climate of Africa.
d How does altitude control the temperature and rainfall conditions of 
Africa in general, and of Eastern Africa in particular.
2 Answer the following questions.
a How does altitude affect the climate of Africa?
b What are the major ocean currents that affect the climate of Africa?
c What are the major planetary winds that affect the distribution of rainfall 
in Africa?
d Account for the impact of distance from the sea on the climate of Africa.
Figure 3.10: Major winds that affect the climate of Africa
Grade 11 Geography 130
3.3 Climate Of Africa
3.3.2 Temperature Conditions in Africa
Brainstorming
1 How is the spatial and seasonal distribution of temperature in Africa? 
2 Which areas in Africa are the hottest? What about the coldest ones? 
3 Why does such a variation in temperature occur?
Spatially, lowlands (coastal areas) and the desert and semi desert areas of Africa 
experience the highest temperatures in the continent. The Sahara, the largest 
desert in the world, has the highest temperature. The Kalahari Desert in the 
south has relatively cooler temperatures as a result of the cold Benguela ocean 
current. The Ethiopian and East African highlands, on the other hand, have lower 
temperature condition as a result of their high altitude. The Atlas of Morocco 
and Cape Ranges of south Africa have the lowest temperature in the continent as 
a result of their high altitudinal and latitudinal location.
The distribution of temperature in Africa also has seasonal variation. Such 
variation is the result of the apparent movement of the overhead sun between 
the two tropics. The months of December, January and February constitute the 
summer season in the southern hemisphere. During this time, the sun is overhead, 
south of the equator. As a result, areas of high temperature are found in Southern 
Africa. The Northern and northeastern parts of the continent remain relatively 
cool and dry at this time. 
Similarly, the summer season in the northern hemisphere corresponds with the 
months of June, July and August. This season is a season of high sun angle in 
Africa north of the equator. Hence, the Sahara and other parts of Northern Africa 
experience high temperature conditions. In contrast, the areas south of the equator 
are characterized by lower temperatures at this time.
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 131
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.3 Climate Of Africa
 
 
A F R I C A
A F R I C A
Average Temperature
o Celsius
-53.5 to -27.6
-27.5 to -1.3
-1.2 to -0.6
-0.5 to 9.2
9.3 to 16.5
16.6 to 22.8
22.9 to 25.9
26.0 to 32.5
January
July
Average Temperature
o Cesius
-68.8 to -21.8
-21.7 to 2.0
2.1 to 8.9
9 to 14.1
14.2 to 18.9
19.0 to 23.8
23.9 to 26.7
26.8 to 40.4
Figure 3.11: The Seasonal Distribution of Temperature in Africa (the 
red color Indicates Areas of High Temperature)
Grade 11 Geography 132
3.3 Climate Of Africa
3.3.3 Rainfall Distribution in Africa
The distribution of precipitation (rainfall) in Africa is controlled by the Inter 
Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). The position of ITCZ is, in turn, determined 
by the position of the overhead sun. For instance, in July the overhead sun is 
located near the Tropic of Cancer. Hence, winds that carry moisture from the 
Atlantic and Indian Oceans, the Guinea monsoon (equatorial westerly) and the 
southeast trade winds, invade parts of Africa north of the equator, causing the 
region to receive high rainfall. In this season, West African coastal areas, the 
Ethiopian highlands, and eastern Madagascar get their heavy rainfall. 
In January, the sun is overhead near the Tropic of Capricorn, pulling the northeast 
trade winds southward over Africa. These winds are continental in origin, carrying 
limited or no moisture. In this season, therefore, Northern Africa remains dry, 
except for the Maghreb region, where the Mediterranean type of climate dominates. 
Southern Africa, however, gets its maximum rainfall from the southeast trades 
of the Indian Ocean. The Congo Basin gets rainfall from the moist winds of 
the Atlantic Ocean. To better understand the points so far discussed, study the 
following points.
F The Guinea monsoon(equatorial westerly) winds from the Atlantic 
Ocean bring rainfall to the north of Africa up to the southern fringes of 
the Sahara in July;
F Moist winds from the Atlantic Ocean and the southeast monsoon winds 
from the Indian Ocean bring rainfall to Southern Africa in January;
F The westerly winds bring rainfall to the Maghreb region of North 
Africa and the Cape Province of South Africa in their respective winter 
seasons. Summer is not the wettest season in these places;
F Summer is a season of heavy rainfall in all parts of Africa, except in the 
Sahara desert and the Mediterranean-climate regions;
F Winter is dry in all parts of Africa, except for the equatorial and 
Mediterranean climate regions.
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 133
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.3 Climate Of Africa
 
A F R I C A
Centimeters
0 to 0.3
0.4 to 1.1
1.2 to 2.7
2.8 to 5.3
5.4 to 8.4
8.5 to 10.6
10.7 to 16.6
16.7 to 104.3
Average Monthly
Precipitation
January
A F R I C A
Centimeters
0 to 0.09
0.1 to 0.9
1 to 1.9
2 to 3.3
3.4 to 5
5.1 to 7.7
7.8 to 13.2
13.3 to 131.7
Average Monthly
Precipitation
Figure 3.12: Seasonal distribution of rainfall in Africa
July
Grade 11 Geography 134
3.3 Climate Of Africa
Activity 3.8
By studying the preceding precipitation maps of Africa, answer the following questions.
a Which areas of Africa get maximum rainfall in the months of January, and 
which in July?
b Relate the annual precipitation map of Africa with the political map of 
the continent, and identify the countries that receive the highest annual 
rainfall in Africa.
c Describe the distribution of temperature in the month of July in Africa.
d Account for the spatial distribution of temperature in the African 
continent.
e What are the dominant rainfall types in Africa?
f Discuss the distribution of rainfall in the month of December in Africa.
g What are the major winds that bring summer rainfall to most African 
countries? 
A F R I C A
Centimeters
0 to 12.4
12.5 to 27.2
27.3 to 46.3
46.4 to 66.8
66.9 to 90.4
90.5 to 106.2
106.3 to 153.0
153.1
Average Annual
Precipitation
Figure 3.13: Annual precipitation
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 135
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.3 Climate Of Africa
3.3.4 Climatic Regions of Africa
Brainstorming
1 Do you think that all places in Africa have similar climatic conditions? Why or 
why not? 
2 What are the different climatic regions of Africa? 
3 Which of these climates is/are dominant in your area? Ethiopia? 
4 Can you list the major characteristics that distinguish each climatic region?
The distribution of temperature and rainfall show great spatial and seasonal 
variations in Africa. As a result, many different climatic regions are established 
by these variations. A climatic region is a geographical area with more or less 
similar climatic characteristics mainly of temperature and rainfall. Multiple areas 
can be characterized by a single climatic region, 
There are seven main climatic regions in Africa. These are:
Â Equatorial 
Â Tropical continental (savanna) 
Â Tropical desert and semi-desert 
Â Tropical maritime (monsoon) 
Â Warm temperate continental 
Â Highland (mountain) 
Â Mediterranean 
The following map shows the locations of the major climatic regions of Africa. 
Study it carefully and try to identify the geographical locations of each region. 
Grade 11 Geography 136
3.3 Climate Of Africa
Figure 3.14 shows the geographical locations of the various climatic regions in 
Africa. Now let us discuss the major characteristics and distinguishing features 
of each climatic region.
The Equatorial Climate
Which part of Africa has equatorial type of climate? What climatic characteristics 
does this type of climate have?
The parts of Africa that are found around the equator have this type of climate. 
The region surrounds the equator extending between 6o
 or 7o
N and S latitudes. 
This climatic region is dominant in Western and Central Africa. The region has 
a high mean annual and mean monthly temperature due to the high angle of the 
sun. Temperatures remain high throughout the year, averaging more than 27°C 
annually, and rarely falling below 21°C. Most of the time, the annual range of 
temperature of this region is between 1o
Cto 3o
C. 
This climatic region is particularly known for its wetness. Rainfall is high, 
normally exceeding 1,500 mm per year, and it reaches 3,200 mm in some 
places. The region receives extremely high amount of total annual precipitation 
throughout the year. In this region, the convectional type of rainfall is dominant.
Canaries current
Benguela current
Mozambique current
0 0
Equatorial
Tropiacal (savanna)
Tropical Desert
Tropical maritime
Warm temperate
continental
Highland(mountain)
Mediterranean
Key: Climates in africa
0
23 1
2 N
0
23 1
2 S
Figure 3.14: Climate Regions in Africa
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 137
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.3 Climate Of Africa
The region is characterized by:
F High sun angle throughout the year;
F High mean monthly and mean annual temperatures;
F High daily and low annual range of temperature; and
F High total annual rainfall, with rain falling throughout the year.
Tropical Continental (Savanna) Climate
Where in Africa do we have the savanna climate? What climatic features 
characterize this type of climate?
This climatic region is found between 5o
 and 15o north and south latitudes. It 
occurs north and south of the tropical wet zone, in many parts of Western Africa 
and Southern Africa and in most of Madagascar. The region is situated between 
the wettest and driest climate zones of the continent. As a result, it is said to be 
the zone of transition between the equatorial and the desert climatic regions of 
Africa. In this region, summer is very hot, with an average temperature of 25o
C, 
and winter is cool, with an average temperature of slightly above 15o
C. 
The region is characterized by:
F a well-defined dry season of three to eight months, with annual rainfall 
ranging between 500 and 1,500 mm; 
F a progressive decline in total annual rainfall,north and south wards; 
F that part of the savanna which borders the equatorial rainfall region 
receives high rainfall, with that amount decreasing as distance from the 
equator increases.
F slightly higher ranges of temperature than the equatorial climatic zone, 
with the range increasing with distance from the equator; and
F high daily temperatures averaging more than 30°C in its northern 
section throughout the year, with relatively lower temperatures in its 
Southern and eastern sections, due to higher altitudes.
The Tropical Desert and Semi-desert Climate
What characterizes the desert and semi-desert climatic regions? Where in 
Africa are these types of climate found? 
This type of climate is found bordering the tropical savanna climatic region, 
especially in north central and Southern Africa. There are two types of deserts in 
Africa. These are the coastal and continental deserts. The coastal type includes 
deserts that are found along the western coast of the continent, like the Namib 
and western Sahara. 
Grade 11 Geography 138
3.3 Climate Of Africa
In contrast, the Sahara, which constitutes Africa’s continental type of desert, is 
located north of the equator. 
The following characteristics distinguish the tropical-desert and semi-desert 
climatic region from the others.
F A short rainy season of up to three months. There are about 250 to 500 
mm of rain per year in the semi-desert areas and less than 250 mm in 
the desert regions;
F Variable, unreliable and insufficient precipitation, which hinders plant 
growth;
F High daily average temperature, which ranges between 25°C and 36°C;
F Significant annual temperature variations and also extreme fluctuations 
in temperature over the course of a day. For instance, in the Sahara 
desert, daytime summer temperatures exceed 50°C, but winter night 
temperatures drop below freezing.
Tropical Maritime (Monsoon) Climate
Where is the location of monsoon climates in Africa? What features characterize it?
The tropical monsoon climatic region is found only in the southern hemisphere, 
dominating areas that are located on the southeast coast of Africa. The region 
extends roughly between Durban in South Africa and Dar-es-Salaam in Tanzania. 
The region’s characteristics are similar to those of the tropical climates, with 
heavy rainfall almost throughout the year. This characteristic is the result of the 
warm Mozambique Ocean Current, which brings warm and moisture. Summer 
is the wettest season of the region. Temperature is high throughout the year, with 
summer being the hottest season, and winter being warm. Temperature ranges 
are greater than in the equatorial areas, though they are not as high as in the 
tropical continental climates. 
The region is characterized by the following conditions.
F The impact of the warm Mozambique ocean current on temperature and 
rainfall conditions;
F High total annual rainfall throughout most of the year, due to the wetting 
effect of the warm Mozambique current;
F High temperature throughout the year, due to the warming effect of the 
warm Mozambique current; and
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 139
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.3 Climate Of Africa
F Low annual range of temperature, which is similar to, but relatively 
higher than, that of the equatorial climatic regions.
Warm Temperate Continental Climate
Which parts of Africa are having this type of climate? What climatic 
characteristics does it have?
This climatic region is confined to the southern part of Africa, especially to the 
high veld (temperate grasslands) of the Republic of South Africa. The region is 
the smallest of all the climatic zones in the continent. Higher rainfall and cooler 
temperature conditions characterize it. The region’s climate is influenced by the 
high altitude of the area. Rainfall is controlled mainly by the onshore winds that 
blow from the Indian Ocean.
This climatic region has the following distinguishing features.
F Great influence of the high altitude of the region on its temperature and 
rainfall conditions; and
F Great influence of onshore winds that originate from the Indian Ocean.
Highland (Mountain) Climate
Which parts of Africa have mountain climate? What makes this climatic region 
different from others?
The highland climate type is predominantly found in areas where altitude is 
relatively high. It is dominant in the equatorial and tropical highlands and plateau 
regions of the continent. For example, the Ethiopian and East African highlands 
and the higher parts of South Africa (The Drakensberg mountain region) and the 
Atlas mountains region of northern Africa have this type of climate. 
The climate is similar to the temperate climate of the world. The tropical nature of 
the regions’ climate is modified by high altitude. Temperature is cool, with small 
annual ranges. Some areas are covered by permanent snow, as on Kilimanjaro 
and Kenya mountains. The region also experiences high rainfall, mainly of 
orographic origin. The rainfall increases with the rise in altitude.
Mediterranean Climate
Which parts of Africa are known for their Mediterranean climate? What 
unique features does this type of climate have?
The Mediterranean climatic region is found in the northern and southern tips 
of Africa. The Maghreb region in the north, from Morocco to northern Libya 
Grade 11 Geography 140
3.3 Climate Of Africa
and the Cape Province of South Africa are the main areas that have this type of 
climate. In this region, summer is not the rainy season. Most of the rain falls in 
winter, with a total annual rainfall that ranges from 250 mm to 1000 mm. This 
makes the region unique in its climatic characteristics. As a result, the region is 
one of the most attractive climatic zones in the continent. Many tourists visit the 
region every year.
The following conditions characterize the Mediterranean climatic region of 
Africa.
F A hot, sunny, bright, dry summer season; and 
F A mild wet winter season.
3.3.5 Drought in Africa
Brainstorming
1 What is drought? 
2 What do you think are some of the causes of drought? 
3 Which areas in Africa are drought-prone?
Drought is a condition of unusually dry weather within a geographic region. 
Expected rainfall does not occur during drought. Therefore drought conditions 
differ greatly from conditions in an area that is normally, or at least seasonally,dry. 
The term is usually applied to a period in which an unusual shortage of rain causes 
a serious hydrological imbalance a situation whereby water-supply reservoirs 
empty, wells dry up, and crop damage follows. The severity of a drought is 
measured in terms of the degree of moisture deficiency, its duration, and the size 
of the area affected. 
Droughts tend to be more severe in some areas than in others. Disastrous droughts 
occur mostly at latitudes of about 15°-20°, in areas bordering the permanently 
arid regions of the world. As most parts of Africa lie within these latitudes, the 
continent is one of the most drought-affected areas in the world. Repeated drought 
is common in many areas. 
Major causes of drought in Africa include unwise use of natural resources, 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 141
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.3 Climate Of Africa
including deforestation, overgrazing and over cropping, expansion of farm lands 
and settlements, and the resultant environmental degradation. 
The repeated drought that occurs in many areas of the continent causes 
environmental degradation, habitat destruction, shortage of water and famine 
(shortage of food). This, in turn, results in the displacement/migration and 
death of people and animals. The huge displacement of people and the high 
rural-urban migration that occurs in many countries of Africa is associated with 
this phenomenon. Drought also affects the biodiversity of a place. As drought 
prevails, plants and animals may fail to survive. As a result, some species of 
plants and animals may become extinct or be exposed to danger of extinction. 
This is happening in the drought-affected areas of the continent.
The Sahel region of Africa is one of the extremely drought-affected areas in the 
continent. The region is a transitional zone between the Sahara on the north and 
the wetter tropical areas to the south. Desertification of the Sahel was aggravated 
by extended drought between the late 1960s and early 1980s, the worst in 150 
years. The stress of increasing human and livestock populations is another major 
contributor. 
Desertification is the process whereby soil loses its ability to retain moisture , 
and then desert encroaches on arable land. Desertification is shrinking the size of 
the Sahel and causing famine in many parts of the region. This climatic condition 
covers many countries that are found to the south of the Sahara desert. As a result, 
they are among the areas repeatedly affected by drought.
The following figure shows 
you the drought-prone areas of 
Africa. Study it carefully and 
try to identify the countries 
that are found in the zone. To 
do so, cross-reference between 
the figure and the political map 
of Africa Figure 3.15.
The Sahel
Figure 3.15: The Sahel, drought-prone 
areas in Africa
Grade 11 Geography 142
3.3 Climate Of Africa
Content Check
I Define the following.
a Climate
b Weather
c Drought
d Elements and controls of climate
II Give short answers for the following questions.
1 What are the major factors that affect the climate of Africa?
2 Write at least four characteristics of Equatorial climates.
Figure 3.16: Sahel drought devastation
NOTE 
The drought in the Sahel region of West Africa, which 
began in the late 1960s and lasted until the early 
1980s, was the worst drought of the 20th century. The 
agriculture and livestock of much of Mauritania, Mali, 
Burkina Faso, Niger, and Chad were devastated, and 
the countries’ economies suffered.
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 143
3.3 Climate Of Africa 3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
3.4 DRAINAGE SYSTEMS OF AFRICA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ demonstrate the major rivers and drainage systems of Africa;
Þ discuss the characteristics of the major African rivers;
Þ identify the location of lakes and swamps in Africa;
Þ realize the economic significance of African rivers and lakes; and
Þ analyze the hydro-politics of the Nile River.
Key Terms
³ Drainage system 
³ Discharge
³ Catchment area
³ Seasonal fluctuation 
³ Swamp 
³ Lake 
³ Drainage Density
Africa is rich in terms of water resources. Thousands of rivers that originate in 
African highlands drain the extensive landmass of the continent. Furthermore, 
large numbers of lakes are found in the continent. Swamps are also dominant 
drainage features in Africa. These resources have tremendous potential. However, 
the people of the continent are far behind the developed world in terms of their 
socio-economic status, and therefore also in the technology and other resources 
needed to develop this potential. 
3.4.1 The Major Rivers and Drainage Systems 
of Africa
Brainstorming
1 What is meant by drainage basin, drainage system and discharge? 
2 What factors affect the drainage systems of Africa? 
3 Which are the major river basins and drainage systems of Africa? 
4 Why does the Congo basin experience low annual fluctuation in its discharge/
volume?
Grade 11 Geography 144
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
The entire area that a river drains is called its catchment area or drainage basin. 
A group of drainage basins, which are supplied by multiple rivers, with common 
characteristics, such as a common destination, form a drainage system. 
Nine major rivers drain the African continent. These are the Nile, Congo, 
Zambezi, Limpopo, Orange, Niger, Volta, Gambia and Senegal rivers. These 
basins are categorized into four major types of drainage systems, based on their 
flow direction. These major drainage systems are 
F Atlantic Ocean drainage system;
F Indian Ocean drainage system;
F Mediterranean Sea drainage system; and
F Closed (Inland) drainage system.
The following discussion provides you with some facts about each drainage 
system. Figure 3.17 shows you the locations of these systems.
CABINDA
CONGO
GABON
CAMEROON
NIGERIA CENTRAL
AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
CHAD
SUDAN
ETHIOPIA
KENYA
UGANDA
ZAIRE
RWANDA
BURUNDI
TANZANIA
MALAWI
ZIMBABWE
ZAMBIA
NAMIBIA
ANGOLA
BOTSWANA
SWAZILAND
LESOTHO
SOUTH
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
MADAGASCAR
SOMALIA
ERITREA
LIBYA
TUNISIA
EGYPT
NIGER
MALI
MAURITANIA
GUINEA
IVORY
COAST
TOGO
BENIN
GHANA
BURKINA
FASO
LIBERIA
ALGERIA
MOROCOO
WESTERN
SAHARA
SAOTOME
AND PRINCIPE
EQUATORIAL
GUINEA
DJIBOUTI
SIETTA
LEONE
GUINEA
BISSAU
SENEGAL
THE
GAMBIA
Key
= international borders
= major rivers
= major lakes
= major lake names
= major river names
LESOTHO = country names
= major seasonal 
 watercourses
R.Niger
R.Orange
R.Limpepo
R.Oubango R.Zambezi
R.Kadai
R.Congo
 Zaire
R.Oubangi/
 Uele R.Shaballe
R.Nile
R.Nile
R.Benue
R.Niger
R.Volta
R.Niger
R.Senegal
L.Volta
L. Kariba
L. Kabora
L. Malawi
L. Bangwedu
L. Mwery L. Rukwa
L. Tanganyika
L. Kivo L. MaiNdombe
L. Edward
L. Albert
L. Victoria
L. Kyoga
L. Turkana
L. Tana L. Chad
L. Volta
Figure 3.17: Major Rivers in Africa
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 145
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa 3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
A The Atlantic Ocean Drainage System
What are the major rivers that constitute this system?
This system is made up of all major rivers that drain westward and southward and 
empty into the Atlantic Ocean. The system is the largest in terms of catchment 
area, annual discharge and drainage density. It accounts for about 90 percent 
of the content’s surface flow. The major river basins that constitute this system 
are the Congo, Niger, Volta, Gambia, Orange and Senegal basins. Several other, 
small rivers are also found in this system. Table 3.6 shows you the major river 
basins and their tributaries.
Table 3.6: Major rivers in the Atlantic Drainage system 
River Basin Length (Km) Remark
Congo 4,380 Largest river in Africa in terms of total annual discharge, 2nd longest river in 
Africa and 2nd largest in the world.
Gambia 1,130 One of the smallest major river basins of Africa
Senegal 1600 Has two major dams. the Manantali Dam in Mali, and the Maka-Diama dam
on the Mauritania-Senegal border.
Niger 4000 Drains Guinea, Mali, Niger, Benin and Nigeria. 3rd longest in Africa.
Volta 1500 Has Africa’s largest artificial lake, Lake Volta; has three major parts. Black 
Volta, White Volta and Red Volta.
B The Mediterranean Sea Drainage System
Which river is the most important in this system? Why?
This drainage system includes all the major rivers that flow northwards into the 
Mediterranean Sea. However, the system has only one major river basin, which 
is the Nile. The Nile is the longest river in the world. 
Two major tributaries, namely the White Nile and Blue Nile, form the Nile 
proper when they converge in the Sudan, at Khartoum. The White Nile originates 
from Lake Victoria in Uganda, while the Blue Nile emerges from Lake Tana in 
Ethiopia, near Bahir Dar. 
The Nile flows generally northwards through the Sudan and Egypt and empties 
into the Mediterranean forming an extensive delta in north Egypt. 
C The Indian Ocean Drainage System
Which rivers of Africa form the Indian Ocean Drainage System?
The Indian Ocean Drainage System includes all the major rivers that flow 
eastwards into the Indian Ocean. This system is the second largest system, in 
Grade 11 Geography 146
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
Africa in terms of drainage density, catchment area and annual discharge. The 
Zambezi, Wabishebelle and Juba river basins are the major basins in this system.
Table 3.7: Major River Basin of the Indian Ocean drainage system
River Basin Length (Km) Remark
Zambezi 2750
Has Africa’s largest waterfall, Victoria Falls; has two major 
dams: Kariba (Zambia and Zimbabwe) and Cabora Bassa 
(Mozambique)
Wabishebelle 2000
Has High seasonal variation, and therfore usually fails to reach 
the Indian Ocean in winter. However, it manages to reach the 
ocean during the summer season.
Jubba 1600 Forms one of Somalis most fertile agricultural region 
in its lower valley.
D The Closed (Inland) Drainage System
What are the rivers that form the Inland drainages system of Africa?
The rivers of Africa that do not have direct access to the sea form this drainage 
system. Most of the rivers in this system have multiple flow directions. This 
makes the system different from the rest of the drainage systems in Africa. This 
drainage system covers nearly 32% of the total area of the continent. It receives 
nearly 4% of the continent’s total annual runoff.
The Awash and Ghibe/Omo rivers in Ethiopia, the Okovango Swamp in Botswana, 
the Sudd Basin in the Sudan, the Danakil Basin in Ethiopia and Eriterea and Lake 
Chad Basins are among the major inland drainage basins of the continent. The 
Chad Basin is the largest inland basin in Africa. 
Table 3.8: Catchment Areas and Lengths of Some of the major Rivers of Africa 
River Length
(km)
Catchment Area 
(‘000’ km2
) Main Tributaries
Nile 6650 2862 Blue Nile, White Nile, 
Sobat, Atbara
Zaire/Congo 4380 3700 Kassai, Ubangi
Niger 4000 1112 Benue
Zambezi 2700 1300 Cubango, Cuando
Ghenale/Juba 1600 168 Dawa, Weyb, Mena, 
Welmel
Wabeshebelle 2000 205 Erer, Fafen, Ramis
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 147
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa 3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
3.4.2 General Characteristics of African Rivers
Brainstorming
What factors affect the economic utilization of African rivers? 
What major features characterize African rivers?
Most African rivers share some common characteristics: 
a Steep long profile: Most of the rivers in Africa have steep courses, as 
a result of the continent's relief. Furthermore, most of the rivers empty 
into the major water bodies by falling from the edges of interior plateaus 
of the continent. This affects the navigability of many of the rivers of the 
continent.
b Waterfalls and Rapids: Many African rivers are interrupted by 
waterfalls and rapids, which impede navigation. The waterfalls and 
rapids are due to Africa’s number of plateau lands, with their steep 
sides, and strong erosion-resistant rock, which the rivers encounter 
in their courses. Some examples of rivers with these features are the 
Congo, Nile, Niger, Zambezi, Orange and Cunnen Rivers. 
Study the following table, which presents Africa’s major waterfalls.
Table 3.9: Major Waterfalls in Africa
Name and Location Height of Falls (m)
Tugela, South Africa 614
Chirombo, Zambia 268
Kalambo, Tanzania, Zambia 221
Maletsungane, Lesotho 192
Victoria, Zimbabwe, Zambia 108
Tis Isat, Ehtiopia 45
c Seasonal Fluctuation: Many of the rivers of Africa have their origins in 
areas of seasonal rainfall distribution. As a result, there are variations in 
their volumes between the wet and dry seasons. The Nile and Niger Rivers 
are good examples of this phenomenon. Both originate in wet highlands 
with seasonal rainfall. In contrast to the other African rivers, the Congo 
River does not show significant volume variation. It is the only African 
Grade 11 Geography 148
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
river with a steady volume throughout the year. This characteristic is due 
to the fact that it has tributaries running from both with in and south of the 
equator.
d Deltaic Mouths and Mangrove Swamps: Many of the African rivers 
have low pressure force along their lower courses. This allows the rivers 
to branch out into distributaries, and results in the formation of deltas and 
mangrove swamps at the mouths of the rivers. For instance, the Nile, Niger 
and Zambezi rivers have extensive deltas and are swampy at their mouths. 
Such conditions affect the penetrability of the rivers from the coast.
e Exotic Nature of the Rivers: Many of the rivers of Africa, like the 
Nile, Senegal and Orange, travel across different physiographic regions 
that range from cool to extremely hot climatic conditions. As a result, 
they lose much of their water through evaporation and seepage before they 
reach their final destinations. The Nile River faces the greatest impact in 
this case. It loses nearly 64% of its total run off through evaporation and 
seepage. The Senegal River loses 54%, and the Orange River has a total 
loss of 44% in its runoff.
 
Activity 3.9
Discuss the following questions. 
1 Identify the major rivers that constitute the Indian Ocean drainage system.
2 Why do African rivers show high seasonal variations?
3 What are the major factors that affect the navigability of African rivers?
4 Define drainage basin and drainage system.
5 Compare the major drainage systems of Africa in terms of their catchment 
areas and annual discharge.
NOTE 
Deltaic mouths, mangrove swamps, the fluctuation 
regime of the rivers, and waterfalls and rapids across 
the major rivers of Africa hinder the navigability of 
their courses. However, these rivers have high HEP 
potential. The water falls of Africa, if regulated, could 
produce enormous amounts of hydro-electric energy.
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 149
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa 3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
3.4.3 Lakes and Swamps of Africa
What is a lake? What about swamps?
Where are most of the lakes of Africa found?
Africa has many lakes and swamps. Some of them are natural, and others are 
human-made (artificial). The lakes differ in their size and depth. For instance, 
lakes Tanganyika and Malawi are deep and large, while Victoria and Tana are 
wide and shallow, respectively. 
Lakes of Africa
The lakes are divided into two types-natural and artificial (anthropogenic). 
Natural lakes are formed by tectonic, volcanic and/or denudation processes. 
Anthropogenic lakes are formed when water is accumulated at the backs of dams 
that are constructed across rivers for various purposes, including hydro-electric 
production and irrigation.
Natural Lakes
What is a natural lake? How are lakes formed naturally?
These are lakes that are formed under natural conditions. Based on location, 
natural African lakes are divided into two groups: Rift valley and Non-Rift Valley 
lakes. The first group includes all the lakes that occupy the floor of the Great 
East African Rift Valley. Lakes, like Turkana, Tanganyika, Kivu, Albert, Malawi, 
Edward and the numerous Rift Valley lakes in Ethiopia belong to this group. 
The major non-Rift Valley natural lakes include Victoria, Chad and Tana. 
Table 3.10 Presents the major natural lakes of Africa and some of their 
characteristics. 
Grade 11 Geography 150
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
Table 3.10: Natural Lakes of Africa
Lake Area (km2
) Maximum 
depth (m) Type Remark
Victoria 83,000 92 Non Rift valley
Largest in Africa, largest 
tropical lake in the world, 2nd
largest freshwater lake in the 
world and 3rd longest in the 
world
Tanganyika 32,890 1435 Rift valley
World’s longest fresh water 
lake, Africa's deepest lake 
and second in the world, 
Africa’s second largest lake
Malawi 30,800 706 Rift Valley 
The most southern lake in 
the Great African Rift Valley 
system
Chad 18,000 12 Non-Rift valley -
Turkana
8,660 72 Rift valley -
Albert 5,500 17 Rift valley
The northernmost of the 
chain of lakes in the Great Rift 
Valley
Meru 4,920 NA Rift valley -
Tana 3,600 9 Non-Rift valley Shallowest in Africa
Edward 3,550 NA Rift valley -
Kivu 2,650 475 Rift valley -
Focus
Most of the African lakes that are found along the Rift Valley are long and 
narrow. Many of them that mark the western branch of the Rift Valley have 
outlets to the ocean through rivers. For example, Lakes Edward and Albert 
empty through the Nile River, and Lake Tanganyika empties through the 
Congo. In contrast, most of the lakes that mark the eastern branch of the 
Rift Valley participate in the Inland Drainage System. Lake Malawi, which 
is also a member of the eastern-branch lakes, is an exception, as it drains 
into the Indian Ocean through the Shire river. 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 151
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa 3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
Artificial (Anthropogenic) Lakes
What are artificial lakes? How and why are artificial lakes formed?
Africa has large numbers of rivers that have enormous hydro-electric 
power and irrigation potential. To utilize the rivers for these and many other 
purposes, large dams have been constructed across their courses. The major 
anthropogenic lakes in Africa are Nasser, Koka, Volta, Kaindji and Kariba. 
Table 3.11 presents the major artificial lakes in Africa.
Table 3.11: Artificial lakes of Africa
Lake Dam River Country
Nasser Aswan High Dam Nile Egypt
Koka Koka Awash Ethiopia
Volta Akosombo Volta Ghana
Kaindji Kaindji Niger Nigeria
Kariba Kariba Zambezi Zambia and 
Zimbabwe
Activity 3.10
In a small group discuss the following questions.
1 Why do people construct dams across rivers?
2 What are the impacts of dam construction on local populations and the 
environment?
Swamps of Africa
What is swamp? How are they formed?
There are many seasonal and permanent swamps (marshes) in Africa. They 
develop mostly in depressions and areas of seasonal flooding along the courses 
of the major rivers. The major swamps of Africa include
F Sudd swamps, along the Nile river basin;
F Kamulando swamps, in the Congo Basin;
F Batorse and Kafue swamps, in the Zambezi Basin;
Grade 11 Geography 152
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
F Okovango swamps, in Botswana;
F Swamps adjacent to lake Chad;
F Mangrove (coastal) swamps along the deltaic mouths of the major 
rivers;
F Timbukto swamps, in Mali along the Niger river.
3.4.4 The Uses of African Rivers and Lakes
Brainstorming
1 What are some important socio-economic features of Africa’s rivers and lakes? 
2 How far are these resources exploited in Africa? 
3 Why are the rivers and lakes of Africa underutilized?
The rivers and lakes of Africa have great potential for development. They can 
contribute to the socio-economic development of the continent if they are properly 
developed and utilized. Some of their uses are discussed below.
Hydro-Electric Power (HEP) 
Africa has about 40% of the world's HEP potential. The steep profile of the rivers 
and the waterfalls and rapids that develop along their actual and potential courses 
make the continent rich in this respect. Although, very little (about 5%) of this 
potential is actually being utilized, large dams have been constructed for this 
purpose. For example, see Table 3.12.
Table 3.12: Major Dams of Africa
Dams River Location
Aswan High Dam Nile Egypt
Owen Falls White Nile Uganda
Koka Awash Ethiopia
Akosombo Volta Ghana
Kaindji Niger Nigeria
Kariba Zambezi Zambia and Zimbabwe
Inga I and II Congo Congo, DR
Cabora Bassa Zambezi Mozambique
Ghibe I and II Gilgel Ghibe Ethiopia
Tekeze Tekeze Ethiopia
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 153
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa 3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
Irrigation
The rivers and lakes in Africa have great potential for irrigation. However, what 
has been utilized so far is insignificant compared to this huge potential. Lack of 
technology, capital and skilled human power, as well as conflicts and political 
unrest, are among the factors that result in low development of irrigation in 
Africa. Among the major irrigation schemes, some are the Gezira and Kenana 
irrigation in Sudan, Nile Delta and lower Nile irrigation in Egypt; Fish river, 
Orange and Pongola irrigation in RSA. 
Fishing
What is fishing?
Africa's rivers and lakes are rich in fish resources. There are about 2,000 different 
species of fish in the continent. 
The most widespread human use of lakes in Africa is for fishing, but this economic 
sector is poorly developed. Most fish production in the continent is for home 
consumption. As a result, very little is taken into the market. This situation is 
primarily due to insufficient technical skills in the continent.
Navigation (Inland Waterways)
Most of the rivers in Africa are characterized by waterfalls, rapids, steep profiles, 
deltaic mouths and seasonal volume fluctuation. These conditions hinder their 
navigability. However, the Nile, Niger, Senegal and Gambia Rivers are navigable 
along parts of their courses, especially in summer. The Congo River is navigable 
for a good part of its course throughout most of the year. Lakes like Chad, 
Victoria, Tana and Malawi also provide transport services for a good number of 
people.
Tourism and Recreation
In many countries in Africa, rivers and lakes are good tourist destinations and 
centers of recreation. The waterfalls along the rivers and the birds of the lakes 
are attractive. The Nile in Egypt, Victoria Falls on the Zambezi River, and Lake 
Grade 11 Geography 154
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
Nakuru in Kenya and Lake Malawi in Malawi and Tis Abay on the Abbay River, 
and Awash Falls in Ethopia are good examples.
Fresh-Water Supply
The rivers and lakes in Africa constitute most of the continent’s fresh-water 
resources. The piped water supplies for urban Africa and the water supply for the 
rural population, are all dependent on the rivers and lakes of the continent.
Source of Minerals and Construction Materials
Rivers and lakes carry various rocks and their fragments that are good sources of 
minerals and construction materials. For instance, the alluvial deposits along the 
major rivers of Africa contain gold and diamonds, as well as other minerals, for 
example, tin in Ghana and Namibia. Salt and potash as well as sand and gravel 
can be obtained from rivers and lakes. 
The Hydro Politics of the Nile River
The Nile River is one of the most politically significant rivers in Africa. In its 
basin countries have significant interest over its water. The countries that are 
found in the Nile basin are Ethiopia, Egypt, Kenya, Sudan, Uganda, Rwanda, 
Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea and Tanzania. Based on the 
general alignment of the river these countries are categorized into two as upper 
course and lower course countries. The upper course countries are those that 
contribute the water for the river and are generally found at higher altitude where 
the major tributaries of the Nile originate. On the other hand, the lower course 
countries, namely Sudan and Egypt, are those that are found at lower elevation 
where the water of the river flows gently over vast plains. 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 155
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa 3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
Figure 3.18: The Nile basin
Grade 11 Geography 156
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa
Blue Nile is the largest contributor of water to the Nile proper. Together with 
Baro-Akobo and Tekeze rivers, Ethiopia accounts for about 84% of the water of 
the Nile.
The Hydro-politics of the Nile is, therefore, related with the degree to which the 
Nile river is utilized in its upper and lower courses. Of the total estimated 110 bn m3
of annual water resource, nearly 65% (72 bn m3
) occurs in the Ethiopian portion 
of the Nile basin. Of this, about 52.6 bn m3
 is accounted by the Abay river alone. 
Historically, the two countries, Egypt and Sudan have been the most benefited of 
all the countries in the Nile basin. This is especially true for egypt where the Nile 
River’s water and alluvial soil along its flood plain have become the source of 
life in the desert affected Egypt. The Aswan high dam that is constructed along 
the Nile River in Egypt has been the most important source of water, energy, fish 
and recreation for the Egyptians. In Sudan, too, the river has been developed to 
a greater extent. Contrary to this, the upper course countries have been the least 
benefited. This unbalanced and unfair utilization of the river between the upper 
and lower course countries has been a great area of interest.
Focus 
The Aswan high dam
F Was started in 1960 and completed in 1967.
F Its purpose was to create an artificial lake of high capacity.
F Its lake is 10 km wide and 500 km long of which 350 km is in 
Egypt and the rest 150 km in Sudan.
F Has a total capacity of storing about 160 bn m3
 water 
F Has the following functions.
K Protection against floods 
K Generating HEP of about 10 bn kwh/day 
K Irrigation
K Reduces salt intrusion in the agriculture field. 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 157
3.4 Drainage Systems Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
However, the countries of the basin are now in a situation where by they are 
working together to bring about equitable utilization of the river. The Nile basin 
initiative is a good example in this case. Through the initiative, the countries are 
working together to maintain balanced utilization of the river in the upper course 
and lower course countries. 
Content Check
Answer the following questions.
1 Name three major rivers of the Atlantic ocean drainage system in Africa.
2 Discuss the major characteristics of African rivers.
3 Write the major rivers across which major dams are constructed.
3.5 NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD 
ANIMALS OF AFRICA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ relate natural vegetation and wild animals with climatic regions;
Þ appreciate the types and economic uses of wild animals in Africa; and
Þ show interest in implementing natural-vegetation and wild-animals 
conservation measures.
Key Terms
³ Natural vegetation
³ Alpine vegetation
³ Wild animal
³ Endemic
³ Xerophite
³ Poaching
³ Reforestation
³ Afforestation 
³ Conservation 
There are different types of climates in Africa. As a result, varied types of natural 
vegetation develop over the landmass of the continent. There are also various 
species of wild animals that inhabit the various physiographic regions of the 
continent. 
Grade 11 Geography 158
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
3.5.1 Major Vegetation Zones of Africa 
What is Natural Vegetation? What are the major vegetation types that develop in 
Africa? What causes a variation in vegetation type and distribution in Africa?
The type of natural vegetation that develops in a certain environment is a reflection 
of the climatic characteristics of that place. Africa has a number of different 
climatic regions with their own distinguishing climatic features. As a result, we 
have various types of natural vegetation covering the different geographic regions 
of the continent. In general, five different vegetation zones can be identified in 
Africa. These vegetation types are discussed below. 
F Tropical rainforests
F Tropical grassland (savanna)
F Desert and semi-desert vegetation
F Afro-montane (Afro-alpine) vegetation
F Mediterranean vegetation
Brainstorming
1 To what type of natural vegetation, is each climate type conducive?
2 What are the dominant types of natural vegetation that could develop in each 
climatic region? 
3 Is there any correspondence between climatic regions and vegetation zones in 
Africa? 
Tropical Rainforests
What is a rainforest? Where in Africa do we have rainforests?
What unique features do rainforests have?
Tropical rainforests develop in areas with equatorial climates. In Africa, they 
are confined to Central and Western Africa, and eastern Madagascar. In these 
places, the climate is typically tropical, with high rainfall and high temperatures 
throughout the year. Tropical rain forests are also known as equatorial broad leaf 
evergreen forests. Africa’s most extensive rainforest is found in the Congo Basin. 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 159
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
The following points give you some ideas about the nature of these forests.
F Rain forests are complex, with these three distinct layers: 
K Top layer – made up of tall trees (30 - 50 m) with buttress roots; 
K Middle layer – made up of tree ferns, lianas (creepers), epiphytes, 
and trees with heights of 19 - 34 m; and
K Bottom layer – consists of ferns, herbaceous plants, saprophyte 
(plants which live on dead plants) and trees with heights of up to 
17 m. 
F They contain broad-leaved evergreen trees (green throughout the year);
F Different plants exhibit different stages of growth at the same time, due 
to the absence of climatic seasons. Some are in flower, some in fruit, 
and others in the leaf-fall stage;
F They have little undergrowth, as the canopies of the tall trees prevent 
light penetration;
F Most of the trees are hardwood, like mahogany, ebony, ironwood, 
rosewood and green heart; 
F They have high species diversity and thick growth.
Study sketch given below to learn what the vegetation in tropical areas looks like.
Upper Canopy:
30 to 50 m
Densest Layer:
Lianas and Epiphytes
Thinnest Layer:
Forest Floor
Figure 3.19: A Sketch of the Tropical Rainforest
Grade 11 Geography 160
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
Tropical Grassland (Savanna)
What is a Savanna? Which parts of Africa have savanna vegetation?
This kind of vegetation develops in areas of seasonal rainfall. Tropical grassland 
vegetations are extensively developed in areas that have wet summers and dry 
winters. 
Tropical grasslands exist in Northern and Southern Africa, and they encircle the 
equatorial rainforests. Rainfall in savanna areas varies, decreasing over the range 
from the forest margins to the edges of the desert. Savanna areas that are close to 
the equatorial rainforests receive more rainfall, compared to the areas at the edge 
of the desert. This results in the development of three Savanna zones in Africa. 
These are:
i Park (Wetter) Savanna: it is found close to the rain forests and made 
up of many trees and grasses. Geographically, it is found in Western 
Africa, northern Congo, southern Sudan and central Malawi. 
ii High (True) Savanna: this type of grassland is developed between 
the wetter and drier savannas. It is made up of more grasses than 
park-savanna areas, and contains scattered trees only. It is found in 
Zimbabwe, Malawi, southern Kenya, eastern Tanzania and Western 
Africa. 
iii Thorn Scrub (Drier) Savanna: this savanna zone is developed 
along the desert margins and is made up of short grasses with widely 
scattered thorny trees, thorn bushes and low scrub. It is common in 
the semi-arid areas of the Sahel region that extends from Senegal to 
Ethiopia, Northern Kenya, Angola and Botswana. 
The main features of savanna vegetation include the following. 
F They have tall grasses that are often as tall as 2 m; 
F Trees are more common than grasses in areas bordering the forest, and 
grasses are more common than trees in areas bordering the desert;
F Most of the grasses wither and turn brown in the dry season and regain 
in the wet season;
F The trees survive the dry season by shading their leaves, storing water, 
having long roots, thorny leaves, and only a small number of leaves.
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 161
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
Desert and Semi Desert Vegetation
What is a desert? What about a semi-desert climate? What type of vegetation 
develops in such climatic regions? In which parts of Africa do we have desert 
and semi-desert vegetation? Why?
Desert and semi-desert vegetation is developed in areas where rainfall is scant. 
This climatic condition is found in the driest areas of the continent. The Sahara, 
the largest desert in the world, the Namib deserts and the Sahel region of Africa 
have such vegetation. 
You may think that deserts are devoid of natural vegetation. The reality, however, 
is that it is different in Africa. The continent's drier areas have high species 
diversity. For instance, more than 3,000 species of plants (about 20% endemic) are 
found in the desert and semi-desert zones of Northern Africa. Even the southern 
deserts support plants. Cactus, thorn bushes and coarse grasses are among the 
most common plants in this vegetation zone. 
Baobab
Acacia
Figure 3.20: Tree types in the savanna lands
Grade 11 Geography 162
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
The desert and semi-desert climatic regions are characterized by very low rainfall, 
extremely high evaporation and low humidity. The plants that develop in such 
regions are xerophytes with high drought resistance. To withstand such problems 
and survive in deserts, desert plants have different mechanisms of adaptation. For 
example, 
F They have long roots that can penetrate to great depths to reach the 
underground water table; 
F They store water in their spongy leaves, stems, roots, fruits, and the like 
(example, cactus); 
F They have waxy or needle-shaped leaves to reduce water loss through 
transpiration; 
F They produce seeds that lie dormant for several years during extreme 
dry seasons until rain falls;
F Their leaves are small in size and few in number, reducing water loss 
through transpiration; and
F They have thorny leaves to protect them from being eaten by herbivores, 
etc. 
Afro-Montane (Afro-Alpine) Vegetation
What type of vegetation is Afro-Alpine vegetation? In which parts of Africa do 
we have this type of vegetation?
This type of vegetation develops over the tropical highlands of Africa, mainly 
over the Ethiopian and Eastern African highlands. In these areas, the climate is 
highly modified by altitude, with temperature decreasing as altitude increases. 
As a result, the vegetation that would have existed in the tropical climate at 
lower temperatures is replaced by vegetation typical of temperate regions. The 
vegetation consists of highland (temperate) forests and temperate grasslands. As 
altitude decreases, vegetation varies. For example, alpine (cold-resistant) plants 
like Asta and Gibera (in Ethiopia) grow in areas with altitudes above 3000 m. 
Afro-montane forests grow in altitudes up to 3000 m. Bamboo forests are found 
at 2000 – 2500 m. Then we find temperate evergreen (coniferous) forests of trees 
such as Tid, mountain grassland, and heath. 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 163
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
Mediterranean Vegetation
Which parts of Africa have this type of vegetation? What are the common trees 
of the Mediterranean vegetation in Africa?
As the name indicates, this type of vegetation develops in the northwestern 
and southwestern extremes of the continent, where Mediterranean climate is 
dominant. The region is rich in plant species. Evergreen and deciduous trees 
constitute a good part of the vegetation of this zone. Cork oak, maquis, and wild 
olive, are among the most common plant types in the region. 
Mediterranean climatic regions have hot dry summer seasons. Thus, plants 
develop certain adaptation mechanisms to withstand the summer drought. Among 
others, the following adaptation mechanisms are common. 
F Storing water in their leaves and bark and using it during the dry 
season;
F Having waxy thick leaves to reduce water loss through transpiration;
F Having spiny small leaves to reduce water loss through transpiration; and
F Having long roots to tap underground water. 
Factors Affecting The Natural Vegetation Of Africa
Despite the richness of the continent in terms of natural vegetation, the resource is 
far from being properly utilized. Deforestation, overgrazing, burning (wildfire), 
and the expansion of settlements and farmlands are among the major problems 
affecting natural vegetation in the continent.
NOTE 
In addition to the five major vegetation zones of 
Africa, there are also other vegetation areas. Most 
important of these is the Mangrove vegetation zone. 
Such vegetation grows in the swampy areas of Africa, 
especially along lake shores, deltaic mouths and flood 
plains of the Congo and Niger rivers , tropical coasts 
and the Okavango swamps. The vegetation includes 
both trees and grasses.
Grade 11 Geography 164
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
Activity 3.11
Answer the following questions.
1 What is deforestation, overgrazing and wildfire?
2 Why do people encroach into naturally vegetated areas? 
3 What are the impacts of human encroachment on vegetation areas, humans 
and the environment?
4 What should be done to minimize human impact on the natural vegetation of 
Africa?
Of all the challenges of natural vegetation in Africa the most serious one is 
deforestation. Deforestation is indiscriminate cutting or over-harvesting of trees. 
The deforestation rate in the continent is both very high and escalating. In the late 
1970's, for instance, the annual rate of deforestation in the continent was about 
3.6 million hectars per year. Slightly less than a decade and a half later, this rate 
(according to 1993 FAO estimations) had reached 4.3 million hectars/year. At the 
present time, the figures are even greater than what we have seen above.
Clearance of tropical forests for various reasons is a common practice in many 
African countries where rainforests develop. People clear the forest for many 
reasons. The major ones, however, are the following. 
F They clear the land for shifting cultivation, especially in the equatorial 
areas where soil leaching is a common problem;
F The need for land for permanent agriculture; 
F The increased need for fuel wood - nearly 90% of African energy 
demands are satisfied by using fuel wood that is collected from forests; 
F Extractive forest uses, such as selective forestry, to get logs for industries. 
Deforestation has multifarious impacts. Forests regulate the climatic conditions 
of the earth and reduce soil erosion. Thus, deforestation can cause climatic 
change, resulting in problems like desertification and soil loss through erosion. 
In addition, where the forest habitats are destroyed, the animals that live in the 
forests are affected. As a result of habitat destruction, animals may migrate and 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 165
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
even die. Deforestation results in the extinction of some of the wild animals and 
plants of the continent. There are also many endangered plants and animals in the 
continent due to deforestation and related impacts. 
Possible Conservation Measures
The problem of deforestation can be reduced through the application of different 
forest-conservation measures. These measures include reforestation, afforestation, 
agro-forestry and social forestry. 
Reforestation: is planting trees in areas where the original forest cover has been 
removed. It is done to replace the trees that have been cut by humans for different 
purposes. 
Afforestation: is planting trees in areas where there was no original forest cover. 
For example, afforestation is appropriate for areas where the land is left empty 
and therefore is exposed to erosion. 
Agroforestry: is forestry combined with farming. It is a practice of integrating 
the planting of trees into farming to provide fuel, fruit, forage, shelter for animals 
or crops, and other benefits. In short, it refers to associating crop production with 
forest development.
Social forestry: refers to planting trees in urban areas in association with human 
settlements.
NOTE 
The problem of deforestation is very serious in Africa. In 
addition to the above-mentioned measures, raising the 
people’s awareness of the importance of forests is crucial. 
In addition, changing the way people make their living at 
the present time is also important, as poverty is one of the 
factors that escalate deforestation.
Grade 11 Geography 166
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
3.5.2 Wild Animals of Africa
What are wild animals? Do you think that Africa is rich in terms of wild animal 
resources? Why?
Brainstorming 
1 What is meant by wild animal? 
2 What are some of the major types of wild animals found in Africa? 
3 Is there any relationship between the distribution of climate, natural vegetation 
and wild animals in Africa? How do you describe that relationship?
It is a well known fact that natural
vegetation serves as habitats for wild 
animals. Thus, the different vegetation 
zones of Africa, together with the 
varied climate and topography of the 
continent, create an ideal situation for 
wild-animal diversity. 
For example, the equatorial rainforests 
of Africa are habitats for different 
species of wild animals. The region 
hosts different kinds of tree climbing 
(arboreal) animals like monkeys, apes, 
baboons, and gorillas, as well as birds. 
The aquatic environment of this zone 
hosts large animals like hippopotamus 
and crocodiles. 
The region has the highest species 
diversity in Africa. Most of the time 
wild animals that live in the equatorial 
rainforest have small body sizes. This 
is because the thick and dense forest 
of the region limits movement in the 
forests. 
Gorilla
Baboons
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 167
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
There are also large numbers of herbivorous and carnivorous animals in the 
Savanna lands of the continent. The herbivore animals include numerous 
species of antelope, zebra, giraffe, buffalo, African elephant, and rhinoceros. 
The carnivore wild animals include the lion, leopard, cheetah, hyena, jackal and 
mongoose. 
African elephants live in grassy 
regions south of the Sahara Desert. 
The savanna elephant is the largest 
of the three species of elephants. 
They live in grasslands and drier 
woodlands throughout Kenya, 
Tanzania, Botswana, Zimbabwe, 
Namibia, and South Africa.
Savanna Elephant
The black rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis) 
once ranged from Southern Africa to 
Western and north-eastern Africa. 
Today, only fragmented populations 
remain in Southern, Eastern, and 
Central Africa. The black rhino has two 
horns, the front one usually larger than 
the rear one.
Black Rhinoceros
Black Rhinoceros and Calf
Grade 11 Geography 168
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
NOTE 
Rhinoceroses are among the most seriously affected wild 
animals in Africa. People hunt rhinos for their horns. A 
single rhino horn can bring thousands of dollars on the 
black market. Consequently, the black rhinoceros and its 
close relative, the white rhinoceros, have been hunted 
nearly to extinction. Black rhinos once ranged throughout 
Africa south of the Sahara but are now restricted to parks 
scattered throughout that range. To prevent inbreeding 
and to ensure the survival of the species, park personnel 
truck rhinos between isolated reserves for mating.
This group of lions lives in the savanna 
region in Masai Mara, Kenya, in Africa. 
The grasslands are ideally suited to the 
needs of these carnivores.
Pride of Lions
Oryx, Mago National Park, Ethiopia
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 169
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
Zebras drink and graze near a river in 
Tanzania’s Serengeti National Park. 
Millions of animals spend the rainy 
season in this grassland reserve. When 
the rivers dry up at the end of the 
rainy season, the animals migrate to 
Kenya’s Masai Mara Game Park, where 
more abundant water conditions 
enable them to survive the dry season. 
Established in 1941, the Serengeti is 
one of Africa’s largest nature reserves.
Zebras in Serengeti National Park
One of the ten largest national parks in 
the world, Kruger National Park in RSA 
covers 19,485 sq km.
Some animals of Kruger National Park
Grade 11 Geography 170
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
There are also various species 
of wild animals in the desert 
and semi-desert areas of the 
continent. The desert fox, 
hares, gazelles, jerboa, the 
wild ass and different reptiles 
like snakes, lizards and 
tortoises are among the most 
common species. 
Spotted Hyena, found 
in many areas of Africa
Wild Ass in the Afar area
The marabou stork of Africa is the 
largest member of the stork family. 
Marabous soar for long distances 
searching for carrion, often feeding on 
carcasses with vultures and hyenas.
Marabou Stork
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 171
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
A mamba is a poisonous member 
of the cobra family. Mambas live 
in tropical areas of Africa and are 
one of the world’s fastest-moving 
snakes.
Green Mamba
Jerboas are jumping rodents 
capable of covering a distance of 
3 m with one leap. Jerboas live 
primarily in the arid regions of 
Africa and Central Asia and feed 
on plants, seeds, and insects.
Jerboa
The desert dwelling fennec has 
the largest ears of any fox, in 
proportion to body size. It uses its 
ears to cool itself and to detect the 
sounds of predators and prey.
Desert Dwelling Fennec Fox
Grade 11 Geography 172
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
Similarly, the rivers, lakes and 
swamps of the continent are 
inhabited by different species 
of aquatic animals. There are 
crocodiles like the Nile crocodiles, 
hippopotamuses, fish (about 2,000 
different species), and different 
species of birds like the guinea 
fowl (the leading game bird in 
Africa), pelicans, goliath herons, 
flamingos, storks, egrets, and the 
ostrich, mainly in Eastern and 
Southern Africa. 
A black-backed jackal in Hwange 
National Park, Zimbabwe, flees 
with a piece of scavenged meat.
Black-Backed Jackal Scavenging
One of the largest reptiles on the earth today, 
the crocodile is also one of the most ferocious. 
The crocodile of the Nile, Crocodilus niloticus, 
pictured here, is one of the best known of the 12 
species of crocodile.
Nile Crocodile
Native to Africa, the ostrich is 
the largest living species of bird, 
growing to a height of 2.4 m and 
a weight of 150 kg. Although 
flightless, the ostrich can run at 
speeds as high as 65 km/hr .
Ostriches 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 173
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
In addition to the above wild animals, the continent also has a variety of destructive 
insects, notably mosquitoes, driver ants, termites, locusts, and tsetse flies.
This wild-animal resource of Africa is of great importance for the people of the 
continent. They serve a wide range of purposes, including the following. They: 
F are used as sources of animal protein in many countries of Africa;
F help to maintain the balance of nature by feeding on each other and 
plants;
They are found in shallow alkaline soda 
or salt lagoons and lakes in parts of 
Africa. Flamingos feed on microscopic 
algae, diatoms, and invertebrates that 
they strain from the water and mud 
with their sieve-like bills.
Flamingos
The South African tsetse fly, 
common to Central Africa, is 
responsible for transmitting the 
parasitic protozoan that causes 
sleeping sickness, a disease that 
can be fatal to humans and 
domestic cattle.
South African Tsetse Fly 
There are approximately 2,000 species of mosquitoes 
ranging from the tropics to the Arctic Circle and 
from sea level to mountaintops. Female mosquitoes 
have hypodermic mouthparts which enable them to 
pierce the skin and suck the blood of mammals, birds, 
reptiles, and other arthropods. Female mosquitoes of 
the genus Anopheles are responsible for transmitting 
the malaria parasite from person to person.
Female Mosquito Sucking Blood
Grade 11 Geography 174
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
F serve as source of income through tourism, legal hunting and legal sale 
of live wild animals;
F provide scientific and educational opportunities to researches, students 
and the like;
F provide inputs (industrial raw materials such as skins and excreta) for 
various industries;
F add aesthetic value to the environment, hence serving as source of 
recreation for people;
Factors Affecting Wild Animals
Despite all these and many other advantages that wild animals provide to 
the people of Africa, the attention paid by the people to animal conservation 
is inadequate. Many animals face serious problems that emanate from human 
interference-for example, with their habitats. Such interventions threaten many 
species. As a result, some animals and birds are extinct and still others, like 
the Mountain Nyala and Walia Ibex in Ethiopia, and the Ostrich in Algeria, are 
endangered or threatened. 
Activity 3.12
In a small group, discuss the following issues.
1 What are the problems of wild animals in your area? What about in Africa in general?
2 What, do you think, should be done to conserve the wild animal resources of Africa? 
3 Are there any measures being taken by the local government or population in 
your area to conserve wild animals? If yes, mention some of the measures.
Wild animals in Africa are facing different challenges. The following are the 
most serious ones. 
F Illegal hunting (poaching): In many parts of Africa, poaching, or 
illegal hunting, is a common practice. People hunt wild animals for 
many reasons. While some are economic, others are socio-cultural. For 
instance, elephants are hunted for their tusks, rhinos for their horns, 
lions, and cheetah, for their skins etc. This activity threatens some 
species like the African elephant and black rhinoceros. Some animals in 
Africa are also brutally exterminated for several reasons. For example, 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 175
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
animals are killed because they are considered to be pests. They are 
also killed for food. People also kill animals to be honored by society, 
as there are cultural group that attach bravery/heroism to killing large 
dangerous wild animals. This practice exists particularly in the very 
traditional parts of the continent.
F Human Encroachment: in many areas of Africa, people encroach 
into the natural habitat of wild animals. For instance, many people 
in Ethiopia enter into the habitats of wild life in the Bale Mountains, 
Semien Mountains and Awash National Parks and disturb the habitat. 
The encroachment is the result of the increased need of human 
populations for farm and grazing land, settlement areas, fuel wood and 
the like. Such increased needs result in:
K Deforestation – people in Africa clear forests for shifting and 
permanent cultivation, fuel wood, charcoal, settlement and the like. 
This disturbs the habitats of wild animals and causes the migration 
and death of wildanimals. 
K Burning of vegetation cover in order to obtain land for shifting or 
permanent agriculture, people set fire to vegetated areas.
K Overgrazing – When land is grazed beyond its carrying capacity, 
overgrazing occurs. This, in turn, leads to environmental 
degradation. 
K Desertification – it is the expansion of desert-like climatic 
conditions, which occurs as a result of changes in the characteristics 
of the local climate.
K Drought – is extreme shortage of rainfall. It occurs when expected 
rains fail to fall in an area.
Elephant populations are on 
the brink of extinction due to 
poachers who kill elephants for 
their ivory tusks
African Elephant Killed by Poachers
Grade 11 Geography 176
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa
Possible Conservation Measures
These and many more challenges are affecting Africa’s wildlife resources. 
Animals migrate, and even die due to the disturbance of their environment as 
humans encroach. To curb the situation the following measures can be taken. 
F Conserving natural vegetation: the conservation of one type of 
natural resource means the conservation of others. Conserving natural 
vegetation that serves as habitats and sources of food for wild animals 
can ultimately help with their conservation. 
F Establishing national parks, game reserves and sanctuaries: these 
areas provide protection and conservation for wild animals. They 
are established to conserve wild animals and their habitats so that 
they have a secure environment that is safe for their survival. In this 
regard, Kenya, Tanzania, the Republic of South Africa and Uganda 
are significant. In Ethiopia, too, nine national parks and many other 
sanctuaries and game reserves have been established to promote the 
conservation of the wildlife resources of the country.
F Controlling illegal hunting: it can be done by developing strict 
legislation whereby illegal hunters are punished or penalized for their 
illegal acts. For instance, an international ban on ivory trade, instituted 
in 1989 by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered 
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and supported by over 120 
countries, has diminished the illicit ivory trade and reduced the related 
wild-animal killing. 
F Raising the people’s awareness: this can be done by educating the 
people about the uses of wild animals so that their attitudes and activities 
change. This is the most important conservation measure, and it needs 
the closest attention, because nothing can be done without getting the 
support of local communities.
F Changing the economic condition of the people through good and 
applicable policies and programs. 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 177
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Africa 3.6 Soils Of Africa
Content Check
Answer the following questions.
1 Describe the equatorial rain forest of Africa.
2 Discuss the major problems of natural vegetation in Africa.
3 What are the major problems that Africa’s wild animals face?
4 Discuss possible measures of conservation for the wildlife resources of 
Africa.
3.6 SOILS OF AFRICA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ state the major soils of Africa with their specific characteristics;
Þ relate the soils of Africa with their respective climatic regions; and
Þ analyze soil problems and measures of conservation in Africa.
Key Terms
³ Soil 
³ Weathering 
³ Erosion
³ Soil degradation
³ Terracing 
³ Contour ploughing
Soil is defined simply as a loose and unconsolidated material that overlies the 
crust of the earth. Soil is Africa’s most important resource. This is because the 
majority of the people in the continent, and almost the entire economy of the 
continent, depend on activities that are directly or indirectly linked with this 
resource. 
Grade 11 Geography 178
3.6 Soils Of Africa
Brainstorming
1 What is soil? How is it formed? 
2 What are the major soil types in Africa? What are the major soil types that are 
dominant in your locality?
3 Can you identify some of the problems of soil resources in Africa? 
4 What measures, do you think, should be taken to conserve soil resources in 
Africa?
3.6.1 Major Soil Types of Africa
Why is Africa endowed with varied typed of soils? What are the most common 
soil types of Africa?
The diverse climatic conditions, natural vegetation and the geology of Africa result 
in the presence of different soil types. The Food and Agricultural Organization of 
the UN (FAO) has classified the soils of Africa into several groups, of which the 
following are the most important: 
F Pedalfers (the largest group in Africa)
F Pedocals
F Hydromorphic soils
F Azonal soils
Based on their geographical distribution, the soils of Africa are classified 
into the following types. These are Ferrasols, Nitosols, Acrisols, Lixisols, 
Plinthosols, Luvisols, Planosols, Vertisols, Calcisols, Solonchaks, Gleysols, 
Fluvisols, Arenosols, Regosols and Leptosols. The geographical locations and 
characteristics of each of these soils is discussed in brief in the next sections.
A Pedalfers
Pedalfers are soils with aluminum deposits. They are soils without a layer of 
accumulated calcium carbonate. such soils have high content of iron and 
aluminum. Soils of this group include the following.
Ferrasols: are found in the central parts of Africa around the equatorial forests 
and savanna lands. They are red and yellow in color. Since they are found in areas 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 179
3.6 Soils Of Africa 3.6 Soils Of Africa
of heavy rainfall, they are affected by leaching. As a result, they are characterized 
by high concentrations of iron, clay and aluminum.
Nitosols: These soils mainly develop in humid climatic regions. Their parent 
materials are usually volcanic rocks. Such soils have a deep profile and are rich 
in humus content. Therefore, they are the most productive soils in Africa. As a 
result, they are ideal for crop production.
Acrisols: These are soils that develop in hilly areas with wet tropical and monsoon 
climates. These soils are weathered, acidic and shallow. As a result, they are 
unproductive. This soil type is found in Western Africa and the Lake Region of 
East Africa.
Lixisols: Lixisols are found in the savanna and semi-arid areas. These soils are 
reddish and sometimes yellowish in color. Geographically, they are abundant in 
the plains of Western Africa, Eastern Africa and east-Central Africa. Lixisols are 
more fertile than ferrasols and acrisols.
Plinthosols: these soils exist on plains and gently-sloped areas. They are soft 
and laterite. Such soils also develop in rainforest areas and the savanna regions, 
where marked dry and wet seasons characterize the climate.
Luvisols: these soils are developed in the Mediterranean climatic regions of the 
continent. They have high mineral reserves and are fertile. 
Planosols: these soils dominate the High Veld of South Africa, particularly the 
waterlogged plains of the country. They are used mostly for grazing.
Fluvisols: fluvisols develop in seasonally flooded plains, valleys and tidal 
marshes. They are found in the Nile and Zambezi River Deltas, and the coasts of 
Western Africa and Lake Chad. They have a brown color. Most of these soils are 
young and fertile. As a result, they are suitable for large-scale irrigation. 
B Pedocals
Vertisols: These are black basaltic soils with clay character. Due to their clay, 
they become sticky during the rainy season and crack during the dry season. As 
a result, working such soils is very laborious. They are found in the Sahel region 
at the southern border of the Sahara. In some parts of Africa, these soils are 
Grade 11 Geography 180
3.6 Soils Of Africa
cultivated with the help of irrigation and rainfed agriculture. However, generally 
they are used for grazing.
Calcisols: They are found in the Sahara and Namib deserts of Africa. Though 
they are potentially fertile in terms of mineral content, they are poor in humus. 
These soils are used mostly for grazing. 
Solonchaks: these soils are found in inland river basins, bottoms of ancient lakes, 
depressions and coastal areas. They are saline and not very productive.
C Hydromorphic Soil
Gleysols: Like solonchaks, they are found in depressions and low-lying areas 
of shallow ground water. They are extensively found in the Niger Delta, the 
Congo Basin and interior parts of Angola. In Africa, these soils are used for the 
production of rice, sugar cane, yam and vegetables. 
D Azonal Soil
Arenosols: They are found in the humid tropical parts of Africa, the semi-arid 
zones of the southern Sahara, southwest Africa and Africa’s coastal plains. They 
are used mainly for grazing and dry farming.
Regosols: They are found in arid areas extending from West Africa to Ethiopia 
and Somalia. They are used for pastoralist grazing. 
Leptosols: These are young, shallow and stony soils that are highly susceptible to 
erosion and drought. They are found in the strongly dissected uplands of Northern 
Africa, the Sahara, and in Southern, Central and Eastern Africa. Terracing is 
the most important mechanism for cultivating these soils. Otherwise, they are 
devoted to transhumance, forestry and tourism. 
3.6.2 Problems and Conservation Measures 
of Soils in Africa
Problems of Soils in Africa
What are the major problems of soil in Africa? What measures, do you think, 
should be taken to conserve Africa’s soil resources?
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 181
3.6 Soils Of Africa 3.6 Soils Of Africa
Soil erosion and environmental degradation are among the major problems 
concerning soils in Africa. The major causes of soil erosion and degradation in 
the continent include traditional farming practices, overgrazing, deforestation, 
and over-exploitation of vegetation for domestic uses. Due to these and many 
other factors, the continent loses huge amounts of soil every year to erosion. 
Also, such problems result in the deterioration of the quality and productivity of 
the soil. 
Soil erosion is affecting Africa in many ways. Among others, the following are 
the major impacts. It results in the:
F deterioration and depletion of agricultural and range (pasture) lands;
F decline of productivity of the major cereal crops;
F the collapse of agriculture and thereby the migration of people;
F downstream pollution, sedimentation, floods and damage to settlements, 
irrigation and farmlands;
F comsumption of national economic resources to control erosion. For 
example, Zimbabwe invests 3% of its total annual budget for applying 
fertilizer to replace nutrients lost through erosion.
As we have said earlier, soil erosion is serious throughout Africa. However, the 
problem is more intense in some areas than others. 
These areas are highly affected by the problem.
F Most of the Sahel Region of Western Africa, and the Sahara and Namib 
deserts of Africa where wind is the major agent of erosion;
F The subhumid (savanna) regions and the tropical rainforests, where 
water is the main agent of erosion; and
F The tropical highlands and mountain areas of Africa such as those of 
Ethiopia and other East African countries.
Activity 3.13
In a small group, discuss the following points.
1 What are the impacts of soil erosion in your area? What about in Ethiopia and 
Africa?
2 What do people do to conserve soil in your area? What other measures do you 
suggest to better conserve soil resources in Africa?
Grade 11 Geography 182
3.6 Soils Of Africa
Conservation Measures
Major soil conservation measures that could be taken to increase soil fertility in 
Africa include the following.
F Terracing: constructing stair like structures along hillsides to reduce 
the speed at which water flows down the slope, thereby reducing erosion.
F Agroforestry: is associating agriculture with forest development.
F Afforestation: is planting trees in areas which originally were not 
covered by forests. 
F Reforestation: is planting tree seedlings to replace cut forests.
F Windbreaks and shelter-belt plantations: planting trees along a line to 
break the speed of the blowing wind and reduce its erosivity.
F Check dams: are small ditches that are prepared along sloppy areas to 
reduce the impact of the down slope surface flow.
F Strip cultivation: is planting two or more types of crops on the same 
farm, using a pattern of stripes of alternating crops. This approach 
reduces soil erosion because different types of plants use different ways 
of binding soil particles to themselves. 
F Contour plowing: is plowing the land sideways, following contours. It 
is commonly used in sloped areas, forming furrows perpendicular to 
the angle of the slope. These furrows act as blocks, slowing the flow of 
downhill water. 
F Crop rotation: planting different crops alternately on a farm.
F “Green manure”: This approach uses plants that have soil-nutrient 
value to enrich the soil in the same way that animal faeces are used as 
fertilizer. The “green manure” plants are cultivated on the land and 
then ploughed under to mix them with the soil.
F Mulching: is covering the soil with plant residue to let the soil regain 
some nutrients as the residue decays.
F Fallowing: is leaving the farm idle for a while until the soil regains its 
fertility.
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 183
Unit Review 3.6 Soils Of Africa
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY
Þ Africa is absolutely located between 37o21’ N and 34o52’ S latitude and 
17o33’ W and 51o28’ E longitude.
Þ As a result of the absolute location of Africa, the continent is characterized 
by almost balanced east-west and north-south extent, tropical location, 
and its being crossed by the equator almost at its half.
Þ Relatively, the continent is close to Europe and Asia. It gets closer to Europe 
across the Strait of Gibraltar, which is about 22 kms wide between Morocco 
and Spain. With relation to Asia, the continent comes closer across the 
Strait of Bab-el Mandab, which is about 40 kms wide. A narrow stretch of 
land called Isthmus of Suez, which is now cut into an artificial canal called 
the Suez Canal, connects Africa with Asia.
Þ Africa has a total area of 30.4 million sq. km. Accounting for about 20.2% of 
the world’s total land area, the continent is the second largest in the world, 
next to Asia.
Þ The presence of large area for settlement, high resource potentials, varied 
climate, and plant and animal life are among the advantages of Africa’s 
large area.
Þ The absence of smooth coastlines and more or less equal north-south and 
east-west distance makes Africa’s shape relatively compact.
Þ The continent of Africa is generally divided into five major regional units. 
These are Northern Africa, Southern Africa, Central Africa, Western Africa 
and Eastern Africa.
Þ Serious of denudation and peneplanation activities dominated Africa’s 
geological history during the Palaeozoic era.
Þ Alternate sinking and rising of the land of the Horn of Africa had been a 
common geologic event of the Mesozoic era in Africa.
Þ Most of the major landforms and relief features of Africa, including the 
Great East African Rift Valley and the very high volcanic mountains and 
plateaus, were formed during the Tertiary period of the Cenozoic era.
Þ Much of Africa is dominated by plateau lands. Mountains and hills account 
only for 4% of Africa’s relief while plains account for 25%.
Grade 11 Geography 184
Unit Review
Þ Eastern Africa is the most elevated part of the continent having most of the 
very high mountains that rise over 2000 meters.
Þ The Great East African Rift Valley is the world’s largest rift valley system. 
It stretches from Port Biera of Mozambique to Syria in the Middle East 
travelling a total distance of about 7200 kms.
Þ Africa is divided into seven major climatic regions. These are Equatorial 
Climate, Tropical Continental (Savanna) Climate, Tropical Desert and Semidesert Climate, Tropical Maritime (Monsoon) Climate, Warm Temperate 
Continental Climate, Highland (mountain) Climate, Mediterranean 
Climate
Þ Latitude, altitude, ocean currents, distance form the sea, winds and 
atmospheric pressure are among the factors that affect the climate of 
Africa.
Þ Climatic change due to deforestation, overgrazing, and other unwise 
ways of using the natural environment is the common problem in Africa. 
This has resulted in repeated drought and other environmental hazards 
and problems.
Þ Africa is rich in terms of water resources. The continent has thousands of 
rivers, many lakes and swamps. The rivers are generally categorized into 
four major drainage basins. These are the Atlantic Ocean, the Indian 
Ocean, the Mediterranean Sea and the Inland or Closed drainage system.
Þ Presence of steep and long profile, rapids and falls, seasonal fluctuation 
of the rivers, presence of deltaic mouth and mangrove swamps and the 
exotic nature of the rivers are among the common characteristics of 
Africa’s rivers.
Þ Many lakes drain Africa. Most of these lakes are found in the rift valley 
region.
Þ Hydro-electric power generation, irrigation, fishing, transportation, tourism 
and recreation are among the major uses of Africa’s rivers and lakes.
Þ The diverse nature of Africa’s climate has resulted in the presence of 
different vegetation zones. Forests, grasslands, desert and semi-desert 
vegetations, high altitude plants, Mediterranean vegetation, etc are 
among the major vegetation zones.
Þ Deforestation, overgrazing, wild fire, shifting cultivation, etc are among the 
major problems of natural vegetation in Africa.
Þ Africa is also rich in terms of wild animal resources. Different species of wild 
animals inhabit the continent.
Þ Illegal hunting, human encroachment, deforestation, overgrazing, wild fire 
and the like are among the major challenges that Africa’s wildlife face.
Þ Conservation of the natural environment, establishing wildlife conservation 
areas, controlling illegal hunting and raising people’s awareness could be 
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 185
Unit Review
among the major conservation measures of wild animals. 
Þ Different soils with varied characteristics and agricultural potential cover 
the continent of Africa.
Þ Soil degradation due to soil erosion and unwise agricultural practices is the 
most important problem of soils in Africa.
Þ Terracing, crop rotation, green manure, mulching, strip cropping, contour 
ploughing, and fallowing are among the possible soil conservation 
measures.
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 3
I True or False: Write true for correct statements and false if 
otherwise.
1 The north-south and east-west extensions of Africa are almost equal.
2 Being the world’s second largest continent, Africa covers nearly 20% of the 
world’s total landmass.
3 Though larger than Europe in terms of land area, Africa has a shorter 
coastline. 
4 Periods are the largest time divisions of the geological timescale.
5 The Great East African Rift Valley was formed during the Mesozoic era.
6 Mountains are the most dominant relief feature in Africa.
7 The Atlas fold mountain ranges are found at the southern tip of Africa.
8 June, July and August are months of heavy rainfall in Africa north of the 
equator, except in the Mediterranean climate.
9 The equatorial climatic region is wet all the year round with high total 
annual rainfall.
10 The Sahel is the area of Africa that is most affected by drought.
II Multiple Choices
11 Which one of the following factors affects the climate of East Africa the 
most?
A Distance from the sea
B Latitude
C Altitude
D Ocean currents
E Winds
Grade 11 Geography 186
Unit Review
12 Of all the climatic regions of Africa, the one with the highest rainfall 
variability is: 
A Highland climatic region
B Mediterranean climatic region
C Warm temperate continental climate
D Desert climatic region
E Equatorial climatic region
13 Which one of the following was an event of the Cenozoic era in Africa?
A Formation of the basement complex rocks
B Formation of many of the recent volcanic mountains of Africa
C The denudation and peneplanation of the African landmass
D Alternate sinking and rising of the land in the Horn of Africa
E None of the above
14 One among the following is false about Africa. Which one is it?
A Nearly 2/3rd of Africa lies within the tropics.
B Much of Africa gets rainfall in the winter season.
C The Mediterranean climatic region has mild wet winters.
D Eastern Africa is characterized by the Great Rift Valley system.
E Africa has a short smooth coastline, which contributes to the fact that 
its shape is compact.
15 Which one of the following rivers is not part of the Atlantic Ocean Drainage 
System in Africa?
A Limpopo
B Niger
C Volta
D Senegal
E Congo
16 The largest lake in Africa is Lake:
A Tanganyika
B Malawi
C Chad
D Victoria
E Tana
17 Identify the wrong pair.
A Zambezi River-Kariba Dam
B Niger River-Kaindji Dam
Unit 3: An Overview of Physical geography of Africa 187
Unit Review
C Volta River-Akosombo Dam
D Nile River-Aswan High Dam
E Ghibe River-Koka Dam
18 The equatorial rain forest of Africa is characterized by:
A Broad-leafed evergreen trees
B Hardwood trees
C Three canopies
D A small amount of undergrowth
E All of the above
19 Of the major problems of wild animals in Africa one is:
A Afforestation
B Illegal hunting
C Reforestation
D Wildfire
E “B” and “D”
20 A method of soil conservation that involves the construction of fencse-like 
structures along hillsides to reduce erosion is:
A Contour plowing
B Mulching
C Strip cropping
D Terracing
E Fallowing
III Fill in the blank spaces with appropriate answers.
21 Africa gets closer to Europe across the Strait of ___________.
22 The natural land bridge that used to connect Africa with Asia is called 
___________.
23 Africa’s shape can be described as ___________.
24 The northernmost point of Africa is called ___________.
25 The narrow body of water that connects the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden 
is called ___________.
26 The easternmost point of Africa is known as___________.
27 Africa’s total area accounts for about _________% of the world’s land area.
28 Much of Africa’s relief is dominated by ___________.
29 The highest block mountain in Africa is Mount ___________.
30 The lowest place in Africa is called ___________.
31 Africa’s young fold mountains are found in the region called ___________.
Grade 11 Geography 188
Unit Review
32 The part of the Ethio-Eritrea-Djibouti Rift Valley that branches out into 
three at its northern end forms the __________.
33 ___________ is the climatic region found along the southeast coast of 
Africa.
34 The wettest climatic region in Africa is ___________.
35 In March, the ITCZ is located around ___________.
36 The climatic region in Africa that is characterized by a mild wet winter 
season is ___________.
37 The wetness of the tropical monsoon climate in Africa is attributed 
to___________.
38 Rainfall in the Mediterranean climatic region is brought by the ___________
winds.
39 The climate of the equatorial and tropical highlands of Africa is highly 
dominated by ___________.
40 The most dominant type of rainfall in equatorial Africa is ___________.
41 The Mediterranean type of climate in Africa is located in the ___________
and ___________ regions.
IV Arrange the following geologic events according to their 
reverse chronological order, from the most recent to the oldest.
a Formation of the Rift Valley.
b Formation of the Atlas Mountains.
c Occurrence of pluvial rains in Tropical Africa.
d Formation of the Red Sea.
e Formation of the basement complex rocks