Do you remember the definitions of geography you learned in previous grades?
Geography is a discipline that attempts to understand human and physical 
aspects of the world. Its primary concerns are location, time and the concept that 
everything that happens to us is affected by our surroundings, including other 
people and the places within which we live, work and travel. (Khaskar: 1)
Geography helps us to understand how the world is changing. By studying 
geography, you will conceive:
F how places and landscapes are formed
F how people and their environments interact
F what decisions we make to further our social interests 
F what causes the diverse range of cultures and societies, and what results 
from these. 
Considering such issues motivates us to: 
F formulate questions
F develop intellectual skills for finding answers (solutions) 
F introduce investigative tools
Because of the wide range of geography’s human and physical concerns, the 
questions that arise in its study ultimately lead us to perform research. The goals 
of this research include: 
F producing definite answers to the questions 
F improving existing answers to the questions 
F performing research that leads to a consensus regarding the answers
Unlike the concerns of most social sciences, the social concerns of geography 
are relatively dynamic. To provide sustainable solutions for this fast-changing 
subject, we must use skilled action research. 
In this unit you will learn the skills and attitudes that this approach to research
requires. This information could lead you to become one of tomorrow's 
experienced researchers. 
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 3
Introduction 1.2 The Significance Of Research
1.1 DEFINITION AND CONCEPT
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ explain the concept of research. 
Key Terms
³ Research 
³ Research method
³ Systematic inquiry
³ Discovery
Have you ever attempted a small research project at your class or section level? 
The term research came into English from 
F the old French root word “cerchier,” which means to search or seek; 
and 
F the prefix ‘re-’ which means again. 
Research, therefore, means to seek again with a view to becoming certain. (Desta 
Hamito; 2000) 
By the term definition, we mean a generally agreed-on opinion about the subject 
under clarification. When we define research it is in this sense. We define research 
as a scientific method of investigating answers for the problems identified. It 
is also a systematic inquiry into causes or the discovery of new facts through 
planned and organized effort that requires time, money and skill. 
In short, research is the search for knowledge through objective and systematic 
methods of finding solutions to problems.
1.2 THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RESEARCH
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ show appreciation to the significance of research in tackling social 
problems.
Key Terms
³ Development 
³ Problem solving 
³ Problem identification 
³ Rational decisions 
³ Policy 
Grade 12 Geography 4
1.2 The Significance Of Research
Have you ever imagined or thought about the importance of research?
Development in any country depends, among other things, upon its research 
capability and the extent to which this capability is channeled into action. Also, 
to result in action, the research must be accessible to appropriate institutions, etc. 
Sometimes capable research work never reaches its targeted destinations.
Advances in science, technology and welfare are often considered to be the result 
of capable research. Governments in developed countries allocate huge sums of 
money for research work. Developing countries are also adopting this approach. 
This situation has made research work a good business for professionals. 
Research as a science or professional trade for studying geography:
1 identifies the causes of problems, and the degree or extent of these problems.
Example: The occurrences of hunger, flood, epidemics, etc.
2 adds to the body of knowledge about the problem by providing new 
information and knowledge.
3 enables us to visualize or understand the gap between the real world and 
the formulated theory.
4 provides a basis for additional investigations that validate the research 
findings or that advance the study of the problem by acquiring more data. 
5 widens/enlarges one’s own or a group’s or society's reading and thinking 
scope. 
6 strengthens our capacity for critical observation and enforces our power 
of prediction. 
7 enables us to make rational decisions.
8 serves as an aid to formulating policy. 
Activity 1.1
1 Can you distinguish the differences between these tasks? 
F writing an essay
F writing a report
F writing up research work
2 Ask your geography teacher and others to tell you about the significance of 
research.
3 Use the internet to find information about the importance of research.
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 5
1.2 The Significance Of Research 1.3 Approaches Of Research (qualitative And Quantitative)
1.3 APPROACHES OF RESEARCH 
(QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE)
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ use different geographic research approaches in action research. 
Key Terms
³ Quantitative 
³ Qualitative 
³ Theory 
³ Independent variable 
³ Dependent variable 
³ Inference 
³ Model
³ Approach 
What do you mean by an approach to treating a problem? 
There are two basic approaches to research. Their differences are mainly in 
the attributes to be measured and the techniques to be used for collecting and 
analyzing data. These approaches are called
A the quantitative approach B the qualitative approach
A Quantitative Approach 
We use the quantitative approach when trying to verify a given geographical 
theory. We translate the concepts of the theory into variables that can be measured 
with statistical techniques. 
The advantage of this approach is that the quantitative technique employed by 
one researcher can be used by another researcher for different objectives or for 
further developing the same information. Very simple examples of this approach 
are given below:
F the decrease in land-lease prices as one travels from the center of a city 
to its suburbs;
F the decrease in population density as one travels from the center of a 
city to its edges;
F the decrease in temperature towards the poles from the equator.
All of the preceding examples investigate changes that occur as a function of 
distance from a defined point – for example, from the center of a city. In the 
examples, distance is the determining variable. A determining variable influences
the variation of other phenomena.
Grade 12 Geography 6
1.3 Approaches Of Research (qualitative And Quantitative)
The quantitative approach can be subdivided:
F Inferential quantitative approach: the target-study uses an existing 
data base and infers characteristics or relationships from it.
F Experimental quantitative approach: the research work manipulates 
variables to see their effects on other variables. This approach 
requires considerable control over the research environment in order 
to manipulate the determining variables. As described above, distance 
is the manipulated variable that affects lease price, population and 
temperature.
F Simulation (model) approach: this approach involves constructing an 
artificial environment (model) to represent the actual environment we 
are studying. The artificial environment functions in way that parallels 
the actual environment and generates similar information. We use that 
information to study the phenomena we are investigating.
Example: 
S = f (Pm, S1
, Cl, …etc)
This algebraic model simulates the characteristics and development of soil 
as a system. In the model, 
S = soil, Pm = parent materials (rock),
S1
 = slope, Cl = climate. 
The algebraic model explains soil as a function of its parent material, climate and 
slope. 
The quantitative approach and hypotheses regarding an existing theory are 
established and tested. Also, mathematical analysis is frequently used.
Note
In the preceding examples, distance from a center is the 
determining variable. It determines the variation of these 
phenomena:
Â land-lease prices 
Â population density 
Â temperature 
In all of the examples, we assume that any variable that has not 
been mentioned is unchanging (is controlled).
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 7
1.3 Approaches Of Research (qualitative And Quantitative) 1.3 Approaches Of Research (qualitative And Quantitative)
B Qualitative Approach 
What does qualitative method imply in the field of geography? 
In the qualitative approach, data are used to explain a new theory. No previously 
existing theory or hypothesis is tested by way of this approach. Quantitative 
techniques are not employed. Therefore, the study cannot be repeated by other 
researchers. 
Common techniques for gathering data in the qualitative approach are: 
Â group interviews
Â questionnaires
Â personal observations 
Some examples of subjects that could be studied with the qualitative approach to 
research are: 
F differences between urban and rural populations of Ethiopia.
F differences in academic achievement between boys and girls.
F effects of harsh climate on human activity.
F effects of poor leadership on students’ national examination results.
 Exercise 1.1
I Complete the following sentences correctly.
1 The approach we take to research is a function of the subject or attributes 
of the study and of the techniques to be used for collecting and analyzing 
data. The approaches we choose from are ___________ and ___________.
2 The technique of using interviews and questionnaires in data collection 
comes under the ___________ approach.
3 In the quantitative approach, hypotheses are established and ___________.
4 If a given theory is not to be verified and no hypothesis about it is to be 
established, the approach employed will be ___________.
5 To examine the relationship between availability of books and student 
grades in college entrance exam, we would use the ___________ approach 
to research.
telephone interviews 
in-person interviews (face-to-face)
Grade 12 Geography 8
1.4 The Nature Of Geographic Research
II Vocabulary Skills: See if you can match the items under column A with 
their definitions under column B. Ignore the unrelatable ones. 
A B
1.4 THE NATURE OF GEOGRAPHIC 
RESEARCH
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ reflect the distinct nature of geographic research from other disciplines. 
Key Terms
³ Spatial distribution ³ GIS ³ Spatial data 
Do you always focus on the same issue or center of interest?
Geography's focus has developed in scope and approach over time through the 
development of technology and accumulation of information.
Traditionally, geographical research is related to the locations of places and 
A A tested hypothesis.
B A proposed idea or explanation that is 
based on observed or known facts but 
has not yet been proved. A predictive 
statement that can be tested. 
C Energetic and fast changing.
D Simulation of the real world to explain 
a designed feature.
E To be proved.
F Careful observation.
G Characters.
H To deal with problems.
I A document or case that serves as a 
source or reference.
J Substances or factors whose effects 
are studied.
K Measures or investigates.
1 To tackle problems
2 Dynamic
3 Theory
4 Critical observation
5 Attributes
6 To be verified
7 Inference
8 Model
9 Hypothesis
10 Variables
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 9
1.4 The Nature Of Geographic Research 1.4 The Nature Of Geographic Research
people. In the eighteenth century, geography’s focus shifted to the physical 
and human characteristics of places in our world. In the mid-twentieth century, 
geographical research focused mainly on: 
F the spatial distributions of phenomena and things
F the resulting patterns and interactions
F the forces responsible for the formation of the patterns
Very lately, geographical research has begun to deal with environmental issues 
like hunger, global warming, poverty and the sustainable development of our 
ecosystem. 
In July of 2006, in Brisbane, Australia, the International Geographical Union 
(IGU) commission was formed under the UN Charter that commands worldwide 
geographical education. The commission’s position is that the academic discipline 
of geography is crucial to achieving sustainable worldwide development.
 Human Population
Human population is an issue of concern to geography, sociology, economics, 
political science, etc. Each discipline has its own concerns and approaches to this 
issue. However, the ideas of all these fields of study about population overlap.
Economists’ sphere of interest is largely aggregate demand and supply and 
responses to production. Sociologists’ research work greatly emphasizes cultural 
values, the effect of the population factor on the occurrence of crimes, harmony 
disorders, etc. 
The concerns of geography and geographers are mainly to:
F assess the spatial distribution of the population 
F determine the forces that governed the distribution: 
K is the distribution due to physical factors? or
K is it due to economic factors?
F examine patterns of population distribution: (is it sparsely or densely 
populated, is there uniformity or not?) 
F question whether there is a relationship between the distribution and 
the factor observed:
K are areas sparsely or densely populated?
Grade 12 Geography 10
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
K is there uniformity or not?
F To investigate possible relationships between population distribution and 
other factors.
F look at the impact of populations on the surrounding natural resources 
F foreward views on the sustainability of the area or locality for the future
Thus, we see the differences and similarities between the various disciplines’ 
approaches to the issue of population and we see geography’s specific concerns 
and approaches to population.
In the 1950s and 1960s, the adoption of quantitative techniques in geographic 
research revolutionized the field. Its interest in human-environment relations 
became deeper and wider. At the end of the millennium, the development of the 
Geographical Information system (GIS) produced a powerful investigative tool 
for geographic research.
Do you know what information sciences is? Please study the next section 
carefully.
 Geographic Information System (GIS)
The Geographic Information System (GIS) is a computer system that records, 
stores and analyzes information about features of the earth’s surface. The break 
through that GIS provided is its ability to generate two-dimensional and threedimensional images of an area. Also, it can receive geographical data from maps, 
satellites, photographs, and printed texts and books. GIS allows geographers to 
conduct research on environmental changes. GIS, as an information-acquisition 
and interpretation device, has enhanced geographers’ ability to perform accurate 
high-level research. (Encarta, 2007)
1.5 BASIC RESEARCH METHODOLOGY IN 
GEOGRAPHY
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ use basic elements of research in your action research. 
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 11
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography 1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
Key Terms
³ Research problem
³ Hypothesis 
³ Interview 
³ Sampling 
³ Questionnaire 
³ Research report 
³ Bibliography 
³ Data analysis 
³ Primary data 
³ Secondary data 
Can you distinguish a research method from a research methodology? 
The following three terms are related to one another, but vary in scope.
F research, research method, and research methodology.
A research project is an inquiry into a problem. The researcher’s motivation 
might be curiosity or a specific objective. Research is the foundation of research 
methods and methodology. Research results are important guides for solving 
many business, social, academic and other problems.
A research method or technique is a skill that uses different steps or elements to solve 
the identified problem and arrive at a possible solution. The main methods are: 
F the collection and organization of data necessary or related to the 
problem.
F the use of statistical parameters to treat and interpret the organized 
data.
F the evaluation of the accuracy of the result obtained.
The concept of research methodology is much broader than the former two 
concepts. It is a science that studies how research is done scientifically. It 
considers:
a why the study is undertaken (its significance at various levels)
b how the research problem is identified 
c what assumptions or hypotheses are formulated
d what type of data are collected
e why a particular method or technique of analyzing the data is chosen
In short, research methodology has wider dimensions than research method 
or technique. It is the philosophy or logic behind the research. Studying basic 
geographic research methodology gives you the training you need to acquire the 
skills below:
F gathering materials and data and arranging them 
Grade 12 Geography 12
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
F participating in field work
F preparing questionnaires, interviews, etc. 
F using statistical techniques
F interpreting and reporting results of the study that you have designed 
or proposed.
Activity 1.2
Form a group and study the following two options for your group work. Choose the 
one that best suits your school environment and perform the activity.
1 Ask your teacher to identify some one who is experienced in performing 
research. Invite that person to visit your class and conduct a discussion session 
on 
a what research is
b the significance of research
c the relevance of research for geography
2 Using Encarta or Internet or other possibly accessible materials, conduct a 
group discussion inferring the different concepts stated between a research 
technique and a research methodology.
Basic Elements of Research 
After considering basic questions of the research methodology for their projects, 
geographers conduct their research by performing the following tasks:
F identifying or formulating the research problem
F defining the significance of the study for solving the problem
Note
Research is a time, money and other costs consuming activity 
but empowers you to understand, be logical and be a good 
observer.
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 13
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography 1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
F defining the study of the problem area
F defining the objectives of the study 
F defining the scope and limitations of the study
F reviewing the literature
F developing a working hypothesis 
F preparing the research design 
F defining the sample design
F collecting and organizing the data 
F analyzing the data by using statistical techniques 
F generalizing and interpreting the data 
F preparing the research report, based on the findings
F compiling the bibliography/references 
In what follows, we look at these elements:
A Identifying or Formulating the Research Problem
At the very beginning of a research project, the researcher must choose the 
problem to study. In other words, the researcher must define the area of interest. 
A good approach to defining a research problem is to discuss it with people who 
have significant experience performing research in the study area and to read the 
literature related to that area. 
Investigating the causes of a problem is an important factor for identifying its 
solutions. In some cases, a problem has multiple causes that you must identify.
B Defining the significance of the study for Solving the 
problem
The significance of a research project differs from its objectives. Its significance 
is its importance at a local, regional, national or global level. 
To be significant, a study must benefit a society or community by: 
F providing new discoveries
F improving existing situations
F demanding new decisions
F enriching or refuting already existing theories
Grade 12 Geography 14
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
C Studying the Problem Area
When we study the problem area that a research project addresses, we create a 
detailed bird's eye-view for ourselves and others who will access the research. 
As we study the problem area, we identify problems and eliminate ambiguity. 
This step is particularly important when we research the spatial distribution of 
phenomena and things.
D Defining the Objectives of the Study
A study’s objectives are the goals the researcher intends to achieve through the 
research project. In this step, general and specific objectives are set. The general 
objectives provide short statements of the goal, while the specific objectives 
provide detailed inter-connected statements.
E Defining the Scope and Delimitation of the Study
Research requires time, financing and skilled manpower or professionals. These 
factors are not always available at required levels. Shortages of these resources 
limits the spatial dimension that the research can cover. It also limits the quality 
of the research work. The greater the accessibility or spatial extent, the wider is 
the scope and the amount and quality of information to be obtained; which, in 
turn, leads to greater competency.
F Reviewing the Literature
Did you have the experience of reviewing books? After reviewing, you may 
have the main idea. Try to remember that idea.
Reviewing the literature means identifying, reading and analyzing documentation 
related to the research you plan to perform. For example,
F books
F academic journals 
F conference proceedings
F government reports
F published and unpublished documents related to the problem
For quantitative research, the literature review can help you identify the variables 
and their relationships. You need to understand them in order to establish an 
appropriate hypothesis. 
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 15
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography 1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
For qualitative research, the literature review helps you to expand your knowledge 
of the research subject.
G Developing or Formulating a Working Hypothesis
How do we develop a working hypothesis?
A hypothesis is a preliminary assumption or tentative explanation that accounts 
for a set of facts, taken to be true for the purpose of investigation and testing a 
theory.
Establishing a working hypothesis is crucial for research in all disciplines 
including geography. The information you gain from your literature review will 
help you to formulate an appropriate hypothesis. 
The hypothesis you develop will guide you as you define the types of data to 
collect and decide which methods of data analysis you will use.
A working hypothesis can be formulated based on the ideas you gather from: 
a conducting discussions with experts, 
b inferring from the work of others on similar studies, 
c personal investigations of conducting original field interviews with 
interested parties and individuals.
A hypothesis must have the following characteristics. It 
a should be clear and precise
b should be capable of being tested or verified
c should state relationships between the variables determined
d must explain the facts that give rise to the explanation
H Preparing the Research Design
What is the basis for preparing a research design? 
After formulating the research problem, you prepare a research design. The 
research design is the conceptual framework within which the research could 
be conducted. It helps you collect related evidence. It also helps you to limit 
required time, effort and expense. 
Grade 12 Geography 16
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
The preparation of an appropriate research design for a particular problem 
involves the following considerations. 
i the means of obtaining the information
ii the competence of the researcher
iii the time available for the research
iv the money available for the research
A research design answers such questions as these about your research project 
and its subject: what, where, when, how much and by what means.
I Defining the Sample Design
What factors influence in determining the sample design? 
We typically study samples of the total population in question, rather than studying 
the entire population. If a population is very large, and we try to address the 
entire population, our project might be too large to be practical. For example, the 
amount of information we would need to identify, gather, organize and analyze 
might be too large to manage.
Choosing the population sample is called sampling. The resulting study is called 
a “sample study”. To serve a useful purpose, a sample should be free from bias 
and should appropriately represent the population.
Example
Population
B Sample
A = Population, which is the total unit (for example, the total number of 
students in a school).
B = Sample, which is only part of the total unit but is representative of it 
(for example, only the students in two or three grade levels).
Where
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 17
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography 1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
J Designing The Main Techniques for Sampling
What are the basic techniques adopted in sampling? 
There are two main sampling techniques: non-probability and probability.
i Non-Probability Sampling
F This approach is sometimes known as deliberate or purposive sampling.
F The items for the sample are selected deliberately by the researcher.
F The basis of such samplings is personal decision. 
F There is always a danger of bias in such sampling. 
ii Probability Sampling (also known as 'random sampling') 
F This approach is often called chance or lottery sampling.
F Under this approach to sampling, every item of the population has an 
equal chance of being included (lottery method).
F Only chance determines whether an item is selected or not. Once an 
item is selected for the sample, it cannot appear again.
There are different types of probability sampling (Random sampling). You will 
learn about them when you reach the college level.
K Collecting and Organizing the Data
What is data? How do you collect it? 
There are two types of data collection: primary and secondary.
i Primary Data Collection: This type of data collection is original in character. 
The research produces the data, rather than relying on existing data. 
Note
The appropriate percentage or ratio of the size of a 
population sample to the entire population depends upon 
the variability of the population. If the population under 
study is homogeneous (similar) a small sample is sufficient. 
On the other hand, if the population is heterogeneous, a 
much larger size is necessary.
Grade 12 Geography 18
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
There are several ways of collecting primary data. The important ones are based on 
F The researcher's personal observations. 
F Interviews conducted through telephone conversations and in person. 
F Questionnaires: A questionnaire consists of a number of questions 
printed or typed on a form or set of forms. The questionnaire is given 
to the respondents, who then fill it out by themselves. The questionnaire 
could be given to and collected from the respondents through the mail, 
by e-mail, or in person.
F discussion with groups of people.
F Primary data collection may also make use of schedules. 
This approach is similar to the use of questionnaires but differs in one 
aspect. An assigned enumerator fills out the questionnaire. The enumerator 
schedules appointments with the respondents, meets with them in person, 
asks them the questions from the questionnaire, and records their answers.
ii Secondary Data Collection: This type of data collection investigates data 
that has already been collected, organized and arranged by someone else. 
Secondary data may be either published or unpublished: 
F Published data include:
K publications by governments
K publications by NGOs
K journals
K magazines and newspapers
K reports by universities, scholars, etc.
K historical records, etc.
F Unpublished data include:
K diaries
K letters
K unpublished biographies, etc.
L Analysis of the Data
Data analysis is an essential aspect of the scientific study of problems and 
discovering their solutions. This step involves the use of statistical techniques to 
measure relationships of the geographic variables defined in the hypothesis. The 
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 19
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography 1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
important issue in this step is the selection of appropriate measuring techniques.
Different statistical techniques are employed in analyzing collected data. The 
statistical techniques vary, depending on the nature of the geographical research, 
the variables investigated, the ability of the researcher etc. 
At this class level, you can use:
i simple ratios and percentages
ii pie charts and compound graphs
iii measures of averages and raw-data variances 
Processing research data with statistical techniques results in new discoveries 
or findings, followed by interpretations. Then, based on the findings, 
recommendations are made.
 
M Preparing the Research Report, Based on the Findings
The research report is a major component of the study. Until the report is written 
or presented, no one can use the research results. The report must be clear and 
accurate. 
Even if your hypothesis is brilliant, your research sampling and statistical 
technique accurate, and your results extremely important, they are of value only 
if your readers can understand and appreciate them. 
To create a good report, you must prepare it carefully. A good report is the product 
of concentration, accuracy and the logical arrangement of your facts and ideas.
N Compiling the Bibliography /References
Compiling a bibliography is the final step of your research project. A bibliography 
is a list of written materials relevant to the research study you have performed. 
It includes all books, documents, etc that you referred to as you prepared for and 
conducted your project. 
Note
Be sure that your recommendations are realistic.
Grade 12 Geography 20
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography
Arrange the items in your bibliography alphabetically. Use these formats:
For Books and Pamphlets
1 Name of the author, last name first.
2 Title, underlined or in italics 
3 Place, publisher and date of publication
4 Volume(s) number(s)
Example: Getas A, (2007), Introduction to Geography, 2nd edition, 
Mc Graw Hill, New york. 
For Magazines and Newspapers
1 Name of the author, last name first
2 Title of article, in quotation marks
3 Name of the periodical, underlined to indicate the practice of italics 
in printouts.
4 Volume number 
5 The date of the issue
6 Page or page range 
 Research Process in Flow Chart
F
FF
 where 
= feedback (Helps in controlling the subsystem to which it is transmitted)
= feed forward (Serves the vital function of providing criteria for 
evaluation) 
Define
research
problem
Review concetps
and theories
Review previous
research finding
Review the literature
I
II
III
Formulate
hypotheses
IV
Design research
(including
sample design)
Collect data
(Execution)
V
Analyse data
(Test hypothesis 
 if any)
Interpret
and report
VI VII
FF
FF
F
F F
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 21
1.5 Basic Research Methodology In Geography 1.6 Conducting Action Research
1.6 CONDUCTING ACTION RESEARCH
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ conduct action research on selected problems.
Key Terms
³ Action research 
³ Qualitative approach 
³ Data collection 
³ Sample size 
³ Data analysis 
³ Data interpreter
Please think of various problems that exist at your school. Then perform the 
following project.
Under subtopic 1.5, we saw the basic research methodology and elements of 
research work. Based on that, you will attempt to do a research project practically. 
It is advisable for you do this in groups. 
Action research is an ongoing research process by which a particular real 
problem is identified, information/data are gathered, practical solutions are 
tested, conclusions and recommendations are reached and finally improvements 
are made. 
The following are basic features of action research. 
F It is based on reality. 
F It enables researchers to put ideas into action.
F There is rapid feedback. 
F It aims at improving situations, not at producing new knowledge. 
F It encourages reflections and further developments. 
When we come to action research at this grade level, you are expected to exercise 
elementary research work activities since they are also engaged in studying 
other subjects. Here, the problems identified or selected should be very easy and 
accessible to the students' capacity, time and availability of sources. Hence, the 
following steps are thought to be helpful in conducting action research at this 
level.
Grade 12 Geography 22
1.6 Conducting Action Research
Step 1: Selecting the Problem
In identifying or selecting the problem, this gives opportunities to select problems 
since a problem must come out from the researcher's mind like a fountain comes 
out from a mountain. The following points may be thoroughly considered in 
selecting a research problem:
F the problem selected should not be overdone
F it should not be a debatable issue
F it must be simple and clear so that it does not discourage the participants 
or the students involved in research-work 
Example: 
Assume that the selected problem from the three proposed problems is 
“Low grade achievement of arts students in mathematics exams.” 
Step 2: Objectives of the Study
The objective of the action research is to discover the reasons why art students 
are low achievers and finally find a solution to minimize the problem. This step 
or process is a very pertinent part that will lead to decide on the type and nature 
of data to be collected.
Step 3: Making Review of Literature
This process actually gives the students more ideas, clues and attempted solutions 
from previous work about how to minimize achievement of low grades in a given 
subject. Review literatures should be related to the selected problem that should 
be dealt with. The availability of a good library or previously done papers is 
very essential for this. Teachers should guide the students from where to get 
the required materials. If documents are not available in the school library, the 
teacher should visit affiliated offices and agencies to get information.
Step 4: Establishing Working Hypothesis 
A hypothesis is often considered as the principal tool in research. Its main 
function is to put forward an assumption that can be verified by the research. 
In fact, many action research projects, establish hypotheses. However, it will 
be difficult for grade 12 students to conduct hypothesis formulating and testing 
processes. Both skills demand high competence and experience. It is because of 
this fact that the problem identified, "why most art students often achieve low 
grades in mathematics than science stream students", is forwarded for conducting 
action research at this level.
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 23
1.6 Conducting Action Research 1.6 Conducting Action Research
This action research makes use of the qualitative approach. The data collectable 
could be based on interviews and questionnaires. Sample questionnaire formats 
are suggested below. 
Activity 1.3
Investigating and finding a solution why most art students are less competent 
than science students in mathematics. 
Sample Questionnaire Format
Step 5: Determining the Sample Size
When research is done, taking a sample is essential. Determining your sample 
size can vary because all the students learning this topic at this grade level have 
different class size, different student combination of age, caliber, etc). Let us 
say that 20 % of the population under study will suffice as the sample size. If 
the class size is 100, twenty students are taken as the sample size. In order to 
avoid personal interest or making the sampling random, use a technique of lottery 
system.
Questionnaire format B
(to be filled by mathematics teachers)
1 Name of the school ____________
2 Grade level _____ section _______ 
Academic year ____________
3 What percent of your 
a arts-stream students are good 
in mathematics? _________
b science stream students 
are good in mathematics? 
_________
4 Which-stream is active when you 
teach? Arts or science ___________
5 Please give us your opinions about 
why art students are not as competent 
in mathematics as science students. 
_______________________________
Thank you,
Questionnaire format A 
(to be filled in by students) 
1 Name of the school ________
2 Grade level _____section ____ 
Academic year _______
3 Average grade results in 
grade 9 __________
grade 10 __________
grade 11 __________
4 Which subject do you like best? 
Mention only three of them.
1 ___________
2 ___________
3 ___________
5 Are you good in mathematics 
(Yes or No) _______
6 If your answer is no, give your 
reasons __________________ 
________________________
 Thank you, 
Grade 12 Geography 24
1.6 Conducting Action Research
The selected 20 students represent the 100 students. All the information they 
give represents the whole class or section.
Step 6: Collecting the Required Data
Under this research work, the easiest way of collecting data from the selected 
sample size could be: 
a either through personal interview or
b through questionnaires
The students should prepare questionnaires made up of items that attempt to get 
answers regarding why most arts students are relatively lower grade achievers in 
mathematics than most of science students.
Step 7: Analysis of the Data
In order to analyze the collected data, the teacher should help the students 
understand how to organize the data in a tabular or graphic form. From the table, 
the students can create:
a simple ratios/proportions 
b bar graphs/line graphs
Step 8: Generalization and Interpretation
After applying simple ratios or graphs, the students can make comparisons 
and generalizations. They can prove that most science students are good in 
mathematics than arts students. After that, possible solutions could be gathered 
from the questionnaire and employ the solution to reduce the number of art 
students scoring low marks in mathematics. 
Step 9: Preparation of the Report 
It may be difficult to hear the report of every student. Students could be grouped 
as it was done at the very beginning. The students should bear in mind that their 
reports must include: 
a a clear statement of the objective and the explanation of the method 
used to analyze the data,
b a summarized generalization of the discovery or finding obtained, 
and 
c finally forward the possible solutions that could change the attitude 
of most arts students towards mathematics.
It is advisable that selected students read their report to the class, or if possible 
even at the flag ceremony.
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 25
1.6 Conducting Action Research Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY 
Þ Research is a scientific method of investigating answers for the problems 
identified. 
Þ Development in any country depends, among other things, upon its 
research capability. 
Þ There are two basic approaches often used in geographical research 
works. They are quantitative and qualitative approaches. Their difference 
lie mainly in the attributes considered to be measured and the techniques 
chosen to be used. 
Þ Geographical research works are different from the research work of 
other disciplines/sciences. They are very much concerned with spatial 
distributions and organizations of things and phenomena in time bound. 
They also consider the forces that results in determine the distributions. 
Þ In the study and analysis of spatial aspects, geographical research 
procedures and techniques with other sciences. For example, identifying 
the research problem, defining the objective and significance of the 
research, reviewing literature related to the study, formulating a working 
hypothesis, etc. 
Þ Finally, developing the skill of making action research to solve their 
problems. 
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 1
I Multiple Choices: Choose the best answer from the given alternatives for 
the following statements and questions. 
1 Which of the following geographical approaches is used for confirming a 
given theory? 
A quantitative approach
B qualitative approach
C A and B
D descriptive approach
Grade 12 Geography 26
Unit Review
2 When distance as a varying factor determines the variation of other factors, 
then distance in research is a
A dependent variable
B Subordinate variable 
C independent variable
D A and B
3 Traditional geographic research was largely concerned with the study of
A sustainable environments
B spatial analysis
E locations of places and people
F environmental hazards
4 The International Geographic Union Commission's priority vision is
A the promotion of geographical education all over the world at all 
grade levels
B the promotion of geographical education in developing countries
C the achievement of sustainable development through the spread of 
geographical education
D A and C
5 The 1950s and 1960s were decades of great changes in the science of 
geography because
A geography revolutionized its research methods, adopting quantitative 
techniques.
B the launching of the space shuttle took place.
C geography was assisted by computer-based data sources.
D the technology of remote sensing was adopted in teaching geography
6 Which of the following concepts are guiding and especially useful in 
research practices in geography?
A research technique
B research method
C research methodology
D research desire
E A, B and C
7 Which of the following steps should come first during a geographical 
research project?
A identifying causes
B identifying problems
C formulating hypotheses
D designing research sampling techniques
Unit 1: Basic Research Methodologies In Geography 27
Unit Review
8 Reviewing literature in geographical research 
A widens the researcher’s knowledge of the issue to be researched
B helps the researcher to formulate working hypotheses
C helps the researcher to identify appropriate methods
D all of the above
9 One can claim that a geographical research project is complete when the
A working hypothesis is made
B sampling design is finished
C collected data is analyzed
D report is presented
II Questions to Think Over: 
10 What are the main problems in performing research projects in your own 
school? Please discuss this question in your group.
11 Have you ever thought of questioning why your grades are good or poor 
in mathematics? Please discuss the issue with your art-stream group and 
science-stream group peers. 
12 National and international groups are giving serious attention to the impact 
of AIDS. Can you go to a nearby health center and collect data regarding 
the number of victims in different age groups? After performing this 
investigation, compare the percentage of young victims to the total number 
of victims.
