Human beings have kept track of locations and the directions to and from them 
since we first appeared on earth. As we began to move from place to place, 
looking for sources of water and other necessities and opportunities, we began to 
make simple maps. All good explorers made sketches or maps as they travelled 
to unknown places so that their followers could either trace them or continue to 
achieve the desired goal.
The roots of modern map-making lie in the 17th century. Three key developments 
contributed to modern map making. These developments were 
F The revival of aspects of the ancient Greco-Roman civilizations during 
the Renaissance.
F The Age of Exploration and Discovery.
F The invention of the printing press.
The art, science and technology of map-making is called cartography. The 
technology of map making has its background in the times of the ancient Greeks 
and Romans. They recognized the spherical form of the earth and created maps 
in the form of globes. In this process, they developed map projection and the 
geographical grid system. This technology was lost to Europe during the Middle 
Ages.
After the Age of Exploration and Discovery (i.e., at the end of the fifteenth 
century) geographers and other people became more interested in locating places. 
This interest led to the development of maps. These map makers developed a 
technique based on inserting a light within a transparent globe of the earth. As 
you will learn later in this unit, the light casts shadows of the globe’s features on 
a flat surface, resulting in a map. 
In this way, Europeans developed flat maps and substituted them for globes. 
In the 17th century, they developed the mathematical method of map making. 
They replaced cast shadows with mathematics as the basis of map making. With 
this method, they developed the concepts of parallels and meridians based on a 
standard set of parallel lines covering the whole globe.
In recent years, remote sensing technique has been applied for making accurate 
maps, monitoring the environment and conducting surveys. The need to store, 
process and retrieve the vast amounts of data generated by remote sensing resulted 
in the development of the Geographic Information System (GIS).
Grade 12 Geography 30
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
In this unit, you will learn about: 
F topographic maps and other types of distribution maps. 
F map projection and its various types in making maps.
You will also learn how to:
F make a sketch map. 
F locate and identify geographical elements on a sketch map.
Start-up Activity
1 Do you know what topographic maps are?
2 What is the difference between topographic maps and other types of 
distribution maps?
2.1 THE STUDY OF TOPOGRAPHIC MAPS
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Þ Define topographic maps;
Þ Identify the uses of topographic maps;
Þ Interpret conventional signs and symbols on topographic maps;
Þ Realize the difference between qualitative and quantitative distribution 
maps;
Þ Translate different data into distribution maps using different diagrammatic 
methods. 
Key Terms
³ Topographic map 
³ Signs and symbols 
³ Thematic map 
³ Chrochromatic map 
³ Choroschematic map 
³ Chroplet map 
³ Isoplethic map 
Although many disciplines use maps, maps have a special significance for 
geographers. They are geographers’ primary tools for displaying and analyzing 
spatial distributions, patterns and relations. Because these features cannot easily 
be observed and interpreted in real landscapes, maps are essential to geographers.
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 31
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps 2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
2.1.1 Meaning and Uses of Topographic 
Maps
Meaning of Topographic Maps
What is Topographic map? 
Topography is a Greek word made up of “topos” and “graphy.” “Topos” means 
places, and “graphy” means writing or description. Therefore topography means 
the description or explanation of places. 
Topographic maps are often known as topo sheets. Unlike other distribution 
maps, topographic maps, portray one or more natural and cultural features of 
an area. Simply, topographic maps are maps that show both human made and 
natural features. They can be used for various disciplines to make inferences. 
Nature of Topographic Maps
A topographic map is:
F a map that portrays rivers, streams, drainage, vegetation, roads, 
buildings, land uses, etc.
F a detailed map that shows multiple natural and anthropogenic features;
F a large scale map drawn to show a relatively small area; therefore, 
called a scenery map, too; 
F a map that uses definite symbols, known as conventional symbols.
Series of these maps are: 
F numbered sequentially in this format: 1, 2, 3 … 9, 10 ….
F each presents an area of 1o
 latitude by 1o
 longitude 
F each such sheet is thus 1/16 of the international sheet. These sheets are 
numbered
F These degree sheets are numbered sequentially in this format as A, B, 
C, etc. 
F The degree sheets are again subdivided into half degree and quarter 
degree sheets. These sheets are also sequentially numbered in this 
format as /ANE, /ASE,/ANW and /ASW, …..
Grade 12 Geography 32
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
1A 1B 1C 1D
Activity 2.1
Looking at the topo sheet of Addis Ababa in the next page, 
a identify the natural features shown on it.
b identify the built-up features on the map.
0 1° 2° 3° 4°
4°
3°
2°
1°
PRIM
E MERIDIA
N
EQUATOR
Figure 2.1: Degree sheets
NW
SW SE
NE
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 33
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps 2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
Figure 2.2: The topo sheet of Addis Ababa at the scale of 1:50,000
Grade 12 Geography 34
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
Due to the detailed information displayed on topographic maps, they are classified 
as general-purpose or reference maps. They 
F Help us to study and understand the physical aspect of the area under 
survey in relation to the extent that man has intervened and changed it. 
This enables us to understand the degree of human interference and to 
predict future conditions.
F Show the existing land forms and help us to understand the geological 
forces responsible for the formation of these visible land forms.
F Show the various natural and cultural landscapes. This function of the 
maps makes them helpful for socio-economic planning. They provide 
base-line surveying clues.
F Help engineers to select the right engineering design viewing the 
portrayed features.
F Act as documents for tourists, helping them to reach the places they 
wish to visit.
F Provide information about the landscape and possibly provide other 
information for military purposes.
2.1.2 Conventional Signs and Symbols on 
Topographic Maps 
What do we mean by conventional signs and symbols? Do you remember those 
signs and symbols you have studied in grade nine? 
The skill of map reading and interpretation depends on knowing conventional 
symbols and signs. The signs and symbols on topographic maps are listed and 
explained in the map’s key or legend. These symbols and signs vary in amount 
and kind from country to country. They can also vary within the same country, 
due to varying scales and areal extents.
A very good example is the set of boundary symbols used on the topographic 
map of Ethiopia at the scale of 1:250,000 and 1:50,000:
In the topographic map of Ethiopia, published by the Ethiopian Mapping Agency 
(EMA), the conventional signs and symbols are based on the devices adopted by 
the Doctorate Overseas Survey (DOS) Standard. Their representation is shown 
at the bottom of the map. The major symbols and signs are as follows.
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 35
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps 2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
Cemetery: Christian, Muslem
Town or area with permanent
buildings including public buildings
Tukul or other small building
Road: Asphalt Surface
Road: Dry Weather, with Kilometre Stone
Trail
Power Line
Site of Battle, Mineral Working
School, Hospital or Clinic, mosque, Church
Spot Height (Surveyed)
Forest
Contours (V.I. 20) Depression
Mill, Lighthouse
Swamp or Marsh
Woodland
Boundary: international
Trigonometrical Station:
Bench Mark
Primary, Secondary, Other
Road
Number
Figure 2.3: Conventional symbols used in the topographic map of Ethiopia
Grade 12 Geography 36
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
 Exercise 2.1
1 Why do we say topographic maps are general purpose maps?
2 How did GIS promote the development of map-making? 
3 Compare and contrast chorochromatic and choroschematic maps.
4 State the three historical events that promoted the development of mapmaking. 
2.1.3 The Study of Distribution Maps
What does distribtuion map mean? Does it differ from cadastral and navigational 
maps? 
The Introduction to Grade 11’s geography textbook presented this concept. Try to 
recall what you learned about this in that text; or else refer back to the text now.
Maps are two-dimensional models of the surface of the earth. They portray the 
distribution of features, characters or phenomena. Many kinds of distribution 
maps are used world-wide. Nevertheless, we can group them into different classes 
based on their purposes.
In this section, you will learn about the maps in some of the categories, viz.: 
Â Reference or general-purpose maps
Â Special-purpose or thematic maps
Â Charts
Reference or General Purpose Maps
What are general purpose maps? 
These maps are topographic maps that portray different features at the same time. 
They are made at a larger scale covering smaller areas to show details. 
Thematic or Special-Purpose Maps
What are thematic maps? 
These are distribution maps that emphasize the distribution of a single geographical 
element or character. 
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 37
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps 2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
Example:
F Climatic map of Africa (Annual rainfall distribution).
F Population map of the world.
Thematic maps are classified into two subgroups. They differ from each other on 
grounds of the nature of information they convey.
A Qualitative maps B Quantitative maps
Figure 2.4: Climatic map of Africa
Figure 2.5: Population map of the world
Grade 12 Geography 38
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
A Qualitative Distribution Maps
What are qualitative distribution maps? 
Qualitative distribution maps show non-quantitative attributes. They are 
reclassified into these subgroups:
i Chorochromatic maps ii Choroschematic maps
i Chorochromatic 
Maps: Show the 
spatial distribution of 
geographic elements, 
using colour tint, 
shading, dots or line 
symbols, without 
attaching any numerical 
values. 
ii Choroschematic Maps: Are qualitative maps that use pictures and letters. 
The pictures often symbolized are pictures of the real element. They are 
relatively simple to understand.
Bereha
Kolla 
WoinaDega
Dega
Wurch 
or
Kur
Highlands
Lowlands
Figure 2.6: Agro-climatic zones of Ethiopia
Figure 2.7: Mineral distribution in Ethiopia
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 39
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps 2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
B Quantitative Distribution Maps
What are quantitative distribution maps? 
As their name suggests, such maps display spatial distributions of geographical 
elements, representing quantitative values. The most commonly used distribution 
maps are:
i Dot maps
ii Choropleth maps
iii Isopleth maps 
iv Graphs and diagrammatic maps 
i Dot maps: In dot quantitative maps, each dot represents a given quantity 
or value. To create a clear and accurate dot map, you must 
F place the dots accurately
F be sure there is enough space between the dots to distinguish them
F be sure all dots on the map are of the same size
Source: Woobeshet (2008). 
ii Choroplethic maps: Sometimes they are called shaded maps. They 
display quantifiable features. Choroplethic maps are often used to show 
the distribution of average values such as population density, cropping 
intensity, etc. The type or intensity of the shading reflects variation in 
quantity.
● 50,000 cattle
Figure 2.8: Cattle distribution in Ethiopia
Grade 12 Geography 40
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
Source: Atlas of the Ethiopian Rural Economy
iii Isoplethic maps: Isopleths are lines of equal value or magnitude. The 
lines pass through points at which the value of a particular phenomenon is 
equal. Hence, isoplethic maps are quantitative distribution maps that use 
lines that pass through points of equal value. They are most commonly 
used for representing climatic elements, transportation costs, etc.
Kilometers 
0 150 300
Key
< 1.9
1.9 – 2.5
2.6 – 3.2*
3.3 – 3.8
3.9 – 5.0
> 5.0
Unreliable data
No data
*average national value
Figure 2.9: Population density map of 
Ethiopia
Note
If the intensity of the shading does not correspond to the 
variation in value, then the map is a chorochromatic map.
Note
Before creating an isopleth map, you must define the space 
between isopleths, which is their interval. Use an interval that 
will make the map easy to read and will allow it to contain the 
information you require. If the interval is very small, the lines 
will be close together, and the map might be difficult to read. 
In contrast, with a large interval, the lines will be far apart. 
This might limit the amount of information that the map can 
present.
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 41
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps 2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
Example: 
Isotherm maps are ones that show equal temperature points.
Isobar maps are those that show equal pressure distribution.
Isodapane maps are those that show equal transportation-cost distribution.
Isohyet maps are those that show equal rainfall distribution.
Isoneph maps are those that show equal cloud cover distribution.
 Source: Geography Students text 
Grade 12 (2006) 
iv Graphs and Diagrammatic Maps: These are often, used to show 
economic data, population data and other quantifiable distributions.
Graphs: The simplest and most widely used graphs are line graphs and bar 
graphs. They are used to show the relationship between two geographic variables 
in time and space series.
Both line graphs and bar graphs can use a single or double format. The format 
depends on the items to be shown.
25o
C
25o
C
20o
C
14o
C
20o
C
25o
C
30o
C
20o
C
18o
C
14o
C
18 C
o
18o
C
Figure 2.10: Temperature distribution in Ethiopia
Figure 2.11: Single-line graph Figure 2.12: Double-line graph
Grade 12 Geography 42
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
Diagrammatic maps: These differ from graph maps, in that diagrammatic maps 
are more explanatory than graph maps since they are two-dimensional or areal. 
These maps employ figures such as squares, circles, spheres, etc. The sizes of the 
figures are proportional to the values they stand for.
Example: 
Using proportional squares. Proportional squares are used for making 
comparisons. The area of each square is proportional to the quantity it 
stands for.
To show distributions using proportional squares, follow this procedure:
Step 1: Calculate the square-roots of the values given.
Step 2: Let the least square root computed represent a side of the square 
that measures 1 cm × 1 cm = 1 cm2
.
Step 3: Compute the side of the values in an ascending order and draw the 
squares, using the computed square roots.
Example: 
Ethiopia’s H.E.P potential for: 
a Gilgel Gibe is 300 Megawat
b Fincha is 100 Megawatt
c Melka Wakena is 150 Megawatt
Solution:
Accordingly, the square root for: 
a Gelgel Gibe 300 = 17.32 mm
b Fincha 100 = 10 mm
c Melak Wakena 150 = 12.3 mm
Use the values computed for the sides of the squares to draw the squares. The 
resulting different sized squares represent the different H.E. Potentials of the rivers. 17.32 mm
17.32 mm
Gelgel 
Gibe 12.3 mm
12.3 mm
Melka 
Wakena
10 mm
10 mm
Finche
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 43
2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps 2.1 The Study Of Topographic Maps
 Proportional Circles and Proportional Arrows 
Proportional circles and proportional arrows are one of the various diagramatic 
techniques for showing economic data, population size, etc. They can be used for 
comparative studies of different geographical aspects. 
Likewise, a circle can be also drawn to show the proportional share of individual 
components (piechart). For drawing proportional circles, a suitable value (i.e., 
the least value being represented by 1 centimeter) is selected and radii of circles 
for representing different values or magnitudes are calculated. 
Example: 
Major commodity exports of Ethiopia in 2004/05 (Source NBE)
Coffee 126100 tons, pulses 66200 tons, oil seeds 83000 tons 
Let the export of pulses’ (66200 tons) radius be (supposed radius) = 1 cm 
Then, we calculate others’ radii based on 1 cm radius. 
 Coffee = 1.9 cm Oil seeds = 1.3 pulses = 1 cm
Note
1 centimeter is called the supposed radius of the circle and 
that represents the selected (least value) number. Based on πr
2 
and computed r1
 different sized circles will be drawn. 
126,100 1cm Coffee = = 1.90cm
66,200 tones
×
83,000 tones 1cm Oil seeds = = 1.3cm
66.200 tone
×
Grade 12 Geography 44
2.2 Globe And Map
Similarly, proportional arrows of varying thickness can be used to show different 
magnitudes or flows. Often, proportional arrows are used to portray the degree 
or volume of movements of goods, traffic flow, migration of people, direction of 
exports and imports, etc. 
2.2 GLOBE AND MAP
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ compare and contrast the properties of globes and maps.
Key Terms
³ Globe 
³ Spheroid 
³ Meridians 
What is a map? 
Maps and globes are very important tools that geographers use in order to show 
geographic facts. 
They differ from each other in what they can portray and how they portray this 
information.
Properties of a Globe
What are the particular properties of a globe? 
F Globes are the most appropriate models for representing the surface of 
the earth because they are spherical.
Figure 2.13: Arrow map 
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 45
2.2 Globe And Map 2.2 Globe And Map
F The scale on the surface of a globe is identical over all of its surface. 
F All meridians and parallels on a globe intersect at right angles.
F All meridians converge at the poles.
F All parallels are parallel to the equator and to each other.
F Parallels decrease in length as they approach the poles.
Advantages of a Map Over a Globe
What are the advantages of a map over a globe? 
Maps are used more frequently than globes, particularly in the classroom and in 
fieldwork. 
If a globe is a more accurate representation of the earth than a map, why do we 
often prefer maps to globes? The answer is that:
F Globes are expensive to reproduce and update, but maps are not.
F Globes are not easy to fold and handle, but maps are.
F Globes must be rotated to show the entire surface of the earth, and they 
are not convenient for showing locations and distributions over very 
large areas. With a map, you can immediately see the whole of any area 
shown on it. 
F Most globes are less than one meter in diameter and therefore are too 
small to provide detailed information 
F Globes are not visually convenient, but maps are. 
Therefore, maps are usually preferred over globes in geography. 
Now we consider the case of transferring information from a spherical surface to 
a flat one – in other words we treat the manner how we can create a map, which 
 a) Map b) Globe
Figure 2.14: 
Grade 12 Geography 46
2.2 Globe And Map
is two-dimensional, from the surface of the earth, which is spherical. We use a 
remedial device, map projection.
Activity 2.2 
1 Prepare a globe and a map and present it on the table for discussion
2 By looking at these tools, attempt to characterize each item. And then identify 
the draw-backs for each tool. 
 Exercise 2.2 
I Choose the best answer among the given alternatives
1 Which of the following types of map is appropriate for showing settlement, 
drainage, roads and land use distribution on a single map?
A Thematic map
B Topographic map
C Cadastral map 
D Navigation map
2 Which of the following truly expresses the nature of topographic maps?
A They are small-scale maps.
B They can be drawn at varying scales.
C The symbols and signs used in all topo-maps are consistent.
D A and B.
3 In a thematic distribution map
A only one geographic element is portrayed. 
B settlements and graticules are shown. 
C a number of features can be shown very neatly.
D Both human made and natural features are shown clearly.
II Short Answers
1 Enumerate the differences between topographic and thematic maps.
2 What are the advantages of maps over globes?
3 List the marginal information in the topo sheet of Addis Ababa that uses the 
scale of 1:50,000.
4 What precautions must the map-maker of these types of maps observe?
a Dot map
b Isoplethic map
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 47
2.2 Globe And Map 2.3 Map Projection
2.3 MAP PROJECTION
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ define map projection;
Þ discuss the significance of map projection;
Þ identify the properties of map projection; and
Þ demonstrate cylindrical, conical and zenithal map projections.
Key Terms
³ Map projection 
³ Homolographic 
³ Orthomorphic 
³ Azimuthal 
³ Cylinderical 
³ Equal-Area 
³ Conformal 
³ Equidistant 
³ Zenithal 
³ Conical 
³ Polyconic
2.3.1 Meaning and Significance of Map 
Projection 
What does map projection mean? What is its significance? 
We are quite sure that you can define what a map is and tell what its significance is. 
Meaning of map projection: Map projection is a technique that cartographers use 
to transfer information from a globe to a flat surface in order to create a map. 
Cartographers developed map projection as they tried to solve the problems that 
globes presented. The end result of their efforts was to produce an alternative 
tool – the map. 
Depicting various types of data on a map is the chief objective of a cartographer. 
This demands the establishment of basic information (like grid references, 
boundaries, etc.) on the required map. The acquiring of this basic information 
in turn demands map projection. In this way, map projection becomes very 
significant so that data and other geographic elements will be depicted in their 
appropriate place. 
Grade 12 Geography 48
2.3 Map Projection
2.3.2 Properties of Map Projection
Is map projection a perfect technique of transferring all the information 
portrayed on a spherical surface onto a plane surface? 
No type of map projection is free of distortion. Because cartographers must make 
choices when they decide to pick a projection, they begin by asking themselves 
questions like the ones just below:
The task of representing a spherical surface on a plane surface is complicated. 
There is no way to preserve accuracy. This is because there is no way to cut up the 
surface of a globe that would allow it to lie flat on a piece of paper. The spherical 
surface would tear if you tried to spread it out onto a perfectly flat surface.
Therefore, transferring the graphics on the surface of a globe to a flat surface 
always results in distortion in the graphics. Distortions in one or more of the 
following properties always occur. 
F area
F shape
F distance
F direction (angle)
If you maintain the accuracy of one of these features, some or all of the others 
will be distorted. Therefore, there is no projection type that provides an absolutely 
perfect representation of the earth on a flat surface. 
A surface, such as that of the earth, that cannot be converted into a flat surface 
without distortion is called an undevelopable surface. 
Here are some commonly used types of projections. Each maintains accuracy in 
one of the features by sacrificing accuracy in others.
F homolographic projections maintain accuracy of shape.
F orthomorphic projections maintain accuracy of size.
F azimuthal projections maintain accuracy of direction.
Considering the information that I want to present on my map, 
F what property do I want to preserve?
F what properties are less important?
Then choose from among the properties listed earlier: i.e, area, shape, distance, 
direction (angle).
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 49
2.3 Map Projection 2.3 Map Projection
2.3.3 Geometrical Map Projection
What does the term geometrical map projection mean? Does it have relationships 
with the geometrical figures? 
As you know, map projection is a device of representing a sphere surface on a 
flat and plane surface. This involves a difficult task since the spherical surface the 
globe-cannot be cut and opened into a perfectly flat surface. However, there are 
some geometrical surfaces that can cover the globe partially and they can be cut 
open into flat surfaces. By covering a globe of glass (that illuminates from inside) 
with such a surface (developable surface), the shadows of parallels and meridians 
can be traced onto the paper and then be open into a plane surface. 
When creating projections by casting shadows onto a developable surface, we 
capture the pattern of the shadows on the surface and then flatten the surface.
Here are some commonly used projections that are based on the shape of the 
developable surface. Some of them have sub-categories.
Â cylindrical
Â conic (cone)
Â planar (plane) – also known as azimuthal
I Cylindrical Projections:
What do you mean by cylindrical Projection? Where does the cylinder tangent 
the globe? 
Have you seen balls kept in a cylinder? 
The cylinder tangents the balls at both 
sides. A very simple example is the 
keeping of table tennis balls in their 
cylindrical package. 
Cylindrical projection are obtained with the help of a cylindrical developable 
surface. The cylinder, which is wrapped around the globe tangent to the cylinder, 
is tall enough to parallel both sides of the equator. 
After the data have been captured on its surface, the cylinder is removed from 
around the globe, and is cut open and flattened to create a rectangular plane 
surface.
Cylindrical projections are best 
suited for the projection of tropical 
regions since deformities increase 
polewards.
Grade 12 Geography 50
2.3 Map Projection
Characteristics of Cylindrical Projection
F Parallels and meridians in such a projection are straight lines 
intersecting at right angles.
F The lines tangent to the developable surface are true to scale.
F All parallels are equal in length to the equator.
F Distortions increase polewards from the equator.
II Conic Projection: 
What does conic projection mean? 
This is obtained by covering the globe 
with a cone-shaped developable 
surface. The cone is placed tangent 
to the globe along one, two or more 
parallels, with the apex of the cone 
located above a pole.
Characteristics of Conic Projection
In such a projection: 
F Parallels make arcs of concentric circles. 
F Meridians are straight lines radiating from the pole.
F The parallel tangent to the cone is true to scale. It is known as the 
standard parallel (sp).
Figure 2.15: Cylindrical Projections
Earth projected on cone
Figure 2.16: Conic Projection
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 51
2.3 Map Projection 2.3 Map Projection
F Distortions increase as parallels move away from the standard parallel.
F Conic projection cannot be used to show worldwide distributions. Maps 
created with conic projections are mostly restricted to maps of midlatitude regions so that the area being investigated does not extend very 
far to the north or to the south. Hence, it can be argued that if two 
standard parallels could be selected, an area that includes more of the 
north-south directions could be represented.
F Linear features, such as transcontinental railways and forests, for 
example, coniferous forest regions, can be depicted accurately. 
III Zenithal Projection: 
It refers to overhead position, that is perpendicular. 
This projection is also known as Azimuthal projection. True distances and 
directions in such projection are retained by placing a developable surface at one 
of the poles see Figure 2.17 below.
thal Projectio
Characteristics of Zenithal /Azimuthal Projections
In such projections:
F Parallels are concentric circles.
F Meridians are straight lines radiating from the poles.
Earth projected on azimuth (point)) Figure 2.17: Zenithal Projection 
Grade 12 Geography 52
2.4 Drawing Sketch Map 
What is more: 
F Planar projections produce circular maps. 
F Planar projections are very much suited to maps of polar landmasses 
(high latitude regions).
Activity 2.3
In your group, work out what the following instructions ask you to do in the form of 
discussion: 
1 Compare and contrast globes and maps. 
2 Describe geometrical projection. 
2.4 DRAWING SKETCH MAP
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ define what a sketch map is;
Þ explain the purpose of drawing sketch maps;
Þ discuss the guidelines for making good sketch maps; and
Þ draw a sketch map of a given area.
Key Terms
³ Sketch map 
³ Landscape 
³ Boundary 
³ Location 
³ Route 
2.4.1 The Meaning and Purpose of Sketch 
Maps 
What are the basic differences between a sketch map and a conventional map? 
A sketch map is a freehand drawing that attempts to simulate real features. It is 
an important tool in fieldwork. 
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 53
2.4 Drawing Sketch Map 2.4 Drawing Sketch Map 
The main purpose of a sketch map is to retain required features in field observation 
with their relative locations and sizes. 
We use a sketch map for its following characteristics:
F It can be drawn quickly.
F It is a guideline. 
F It is easily recognizable. 
F It provides skills for roughly showing or recording landscapes.
We do not use a sketch map if its following drawbacks become significantly 
disadvantageous to our goals:
F It does not have scale.
F It is crude. 
F It can be both misleading and clumsy.
2.4.2 Basic Guidelines for Making Good 
Sketch Maps
What is the first step employed in the making of a good sketch map? 
Sketch maps allow geographers to record information very quickly as they 
prepare for complex tasks. They use many types of sketch maps, including maps 
that show location, route and landscape.
Here are guidelines for creating good sketch maps.
F Choose an area to sketch that will be manageable for you as you create 
the sketch map and that will be easy for you and others to understand 
when the map is complete.
F Select the important frames of reference for the area.
F Create a complete mental picture of the sketch map that you will make. 
As you plan the map, remember the features that you want and interest 
you, for instance, such features as: 
K appear in proportion to the map as a whole and to each other
K correct placement so that locations could be recognizable in 
relation to: 
3 each other, 
3 the map’s boundary,
Grade 12 Geography 54
2.4 Drawing Sketch Map 
3 the lines you draw to segment the map into rectangles or 
squares,
3 simplicity in recognition.
F Create the map’s boundaries. Be sure that the final boundary allows 
you to place the features appropriately. You want them to appear in 
proportion to the map as a whole and to each other. You also want their 
locations be recognizable in relation to each other and to the boundary. 
F Divide the edges of the boundary horizontally and vertically to create 
a temporary grid of squares or rectangles. Plan them carefully so that 
you can use them to place the features as accurately as possible on the 
map.
Boundary
F Using a sharp 2HB pencil, a ruler and a soft rubber eraser, begin 
sketching. Use simple lines or symbols to present the map’s features. 
Do your best to present the features clearly and neatly.
F Erase the quadrant lines or dividing lines after finishing the sketch.
F Annotate your sketch map by including important marginal information 
such as its title, key, and northings.
2.4.3 Producing Sketch Maps 
Do you know that sketch maps also vary in type? 
It is a fact that geographers use many types of sketch maps. Here are examples 
of three types:
Â location Â route Â landscape
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 55
2.4 Drawing Sketch Map 2.4 Drawing Sketch Map 
A Location Sketch Maps
These are often used to show the relative location of built-up areas, vegetation, 
human-made features, etc. An example of this is shown in Figure 2.18. 
When you look at the figure, notice the relative locations of the forest, school, 
farm, factory etc.
Activity 2.4
Based on your understanding of the sketch map (Figure 2.18) workout the following.
1 If the distance between the ship and the factory is 500 meters on the ground, 
define the scale for this sketch map. What is the scale in R : F?
2 If the left margine shows the N-S direction, what is the direction of the 
a ship from the factory 
b barn from the mouth of the river
3 Identify the part of the map in which the forest is shown.
B Route Sketch Map 
What distinguishes route maps from location or landsketch sketch maps? 
Route sketch maps are useful for finding one’s way around a new place. They 
are frequently used by tourists, travelers and people who have recently been 
relocated to a new area. These people might use maps of cities and large towns 
to help them spot the places that they visit; for instance, offices, stations, clinics 
and the like.
Figure 2.18: A village
19th Century
Factory
Barn
Grade 12 Geography 56
2.4 Drawing Sketch Map 
Activity 2.5
Assume that the following route sketch map concerns you all. Then look at the sketch 
map (Figure 2.19) and perform the following activities.
1 Identify the location of the Ministry of Education in relation to Miazia 27 square 
of the city. 
2 Describe the routes that take you to
a Sidist Kilo
b Birhanena Selam Printing Press
c Commercial Bank
3 Is it possible to use route A to go to the school? If yes, in what direction would 
you go?
C Landscape Sketch Maps
These are field sketches used to show surrounding areas. These maps could be 
drawn from topographic maps, aerial photographs or from direct field observation.
Sidest kilo
A
B
School
Menelike the II 
secondary School
AAU (Arat kilo 
Campus)
Ministry of 
education
Berhanena Selam 
printing press
Mekonen Bridge Bus Station
Home
Tourist 
Hotel
Bank
Miazia 27 square
To 
Stadium
Organization for 
National Examination
Commercial Bank
Abadir Supermarket
Bakery
Jolybar
Post office
N
Figure 2.19: My route from home to school
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 57
2.4 Drawing Sketch Map 2.4 Drawing Sketch Map 
Example: 
 a) Aerial photograph
 
 b) Sketch map
Activity 2.6
Students, after this lesson, arrange for one Saturday or Sunday, to make an educational 
trip to a nearby out skirt. Decide to make the sketch map of a selected view. Do not 
forget to apply the basic guidelines and decide the type of sketch map you want to 
prepare . Finally show it to your teacher and get comments. 
Figure 2.20: 
Grade 12 Geography 58
Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY 
Þ Based on their purpose, maps are classified into topographic and thematic 
maps 
Þ Topographic maps are detail maps as well as general purpose maps. They 
show both natural and human-made features. Because of this, they are 
used as inferences. 
Þ In order to understand and interoperate topographic maps, it is necessary 
to know the conventional signs and symbols used on topographic maps. 
Þ Unlike topographic maps, thematic maps show only one geographic 
element at a time. Hence, they cannot be used as inferences. 
Þ Thematic maps are again reclassified or subdivided into qualitative and 
quantitative distribution maps. Qualitative distribution maps show nonqualitative attributes, while the quantitative distribution maps show 
geographical elements representing quantities. 
Þ Qualitative distribution maps use colors, shades, symbols and letters to 
show distribution. 
Þ Quantitative distribution maps use colors, shades, symbols and letters to 
show distribution. 
Þ Quantitative distribution maps use graphs, dots and proportional figures to 
show distributions. 
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 2 
I Choose the best answer among the suggested alternatives.
1 Topographic maps are described as scenery maps, because they: 
A are written in block letters 
B show detail information 
C show the whole parts of the earth 
D are true to scale 
Unit 2: Map Use And Map Work 59
Unit Review
2 Thematic maps are different from topographic maps. Their differences lie in 
A purpose
B scale 
C areal coverage
D all of the above 
3 Which standard colour is wrongly associated? 
A brown-relief 
B blue-water bodies 
C green-vegetation cover 
D yellow-urban centres 
4 Which of the following features is not included in the topographic sheet of 
Addis Ababa? 
A roads 
B settlements
C built-up areas 
D weather and climate 
5 Which of the following maps are used to show population density? 
A Isoplethic maps 
B Flow maps 
C Chroplethic maps
D Chorochromatic maps 
6 The most suitable map projection for the tropical areas is 
A Cylindrical equal area projection 
B Azimllthal projection 
C Conic equal area projection 
D B and C 
II Short-Answer Questions: Provide brief descriptions for the 
following. 
7 State the contrasts between thematic and general purpose maps. Give one 
example for each. 
8 Distinguish chorochromatic maps from chroplethic maps. Give two 
examples for each. 
9 What is the distinction between a conventional map and a sketch map? 
10 What factors necessitate the use of map projection techniques? 
