Where is the Horn located? 
Do you know why this part of Africa is called the Horn? 
To answer these questions, look at the map of Africa carefully. You will 
immediately see why this name is associated with a certain area on the map of 
the continent. 
The Horn of Africa, a part of the continent, is a narrow tip that protrudes into the 
northern Indian Ocean, separating it from the Gulf of Aden. 
The Horn of Africa consists of four countries: Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea and 
Somalia. It covers an area of 1.88 million square kilometers and is inhabited by 
more than 95 million people. It is also the home of different ethnic groups with 
distinct cultures. 
Physiographically, it is made up of these landforms: 
F uplifted mountains 
F depressions 
F deep river-cut gorges 
F fault lines and rifts 
F extensive lowlands 
F plateaus 
These physiographic features (landforms) play significant roles in the social, 
economic and political values of the inhabiting people. 
Recent paleonthological findings indicate that the Horn of Africa, especially 
Ethiopia, is the birth place of homonids; see Figures 3.1 – 3.3. 
Â Amharic name, “Dinknesh” 
Â Discovered November 24, 
1974 at Hadar, Afar. 
Â Lived 3.2 million years ago. 
Â Discovered by Johanson 
and his team members. 
Lucy
Figure 3.1: Lucy
Grade 12 Geography 62
3.1 Location Of The Horn Of Africa And Sizes Of Member Countries
3.1 LOCATION OF THE HORN OF AFRICA 
AND SIZES OF MEMBER COUNTRIES
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Þ indicate the location of the Horn of Africa;
Þ compare the size of countries of the Horn.
Key Terms
³ Absolute location 
³ Relative location 
³ Latitude 
³ Longitude 
³ Vicinal location 
³ Geological location 
Â Discovered by Dr. Zeresenay 
Alemseged. 
Â Lived 3.3 million years ago. 
Â A three-year-old girl.
Â September, 2006 
(discovered)
Selam
Figure 3.2: Selam
Â The name “Ardi” is a short form of 
Ardipithecus ramid. 
Â Lived 4.4 million years ago. 
Â The oldest known fossil of a 
human ancestor. 
Â Discovered November 5, 1994 by 
Yohannes H/Selassie. 
Ardi
Figure 3.3: Ardi
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 63
3.1 Location Of The Horn Of Africa And Sizes Of Member Countries 3.1 Location Of The Horn Of Africa And Sizes Of Member Countries
3.1.1 Concept of Location and Location of 
the Horn 
What is your definition of location? 
Why is the location of things important in geography? 
In geography, the term location is a much more abstract concept than what an 
ordinary person knows. This important term is expressed in the form of:
Â Absolute location Â Relative location
Absolute Location 
Absolute location is expressed as a geographical extent, in terms of latitudes and 
longitudes. The absolute location of the Horn of Africa is bounded within:
F 18o
N – 1o
S latitudes
F 33o
E – 51o
24'E longitudes
Because of this aspect of their 
location, countries of the Horn have 
tropical characters and lie in the 
GMT+3 time zone.
33ºE 51o
24’E
0º
1ºS
5ºS
18ºN
EQUATOR KENYA
ETHIOPIA
DJIBOUTI
GULF OF ADEN
ERITREA
Addis Ababa
Moqadisho
Asmara
Djibouti
Nairobi
SOMALIA
Figure 3.4: Absolute location of the Horn
Grade 12 Geography 64
3.1 Location Of The Horn Of Africa And Sizes Of Member Countries
Relative Location 
Can you identify the relative location of your school or residence? 
The frame of reference for a place’s relative location differs from that of its 
absolute location, in that it is the surrounding bodies of water and landmasses 
that come into account instead of latitudes and longtiudes. One way in which the 
relative location of the Horn can be described is as a region or subregion bounded by: 
F the Indian Ocean in the southeast, 
F the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden in the northeast, 
F Sudan, in the north and west, and 
F Kenya in the south.
Relative location can also be expressed in terms of vicinal (nearness) and 
geological (strategic) terms. The geological approach considers a broad aerial 
extent. 
For example, when we describe the geological location of the Horn countries we 
list the Middle East, Southwest Asia, the Mediterranean, adjacent countries etc. 
Activity 3.1
1 Draw a map of the Horn of Africa and show the political divisions of the 
countries of the Horn. 
2 Locate and name their capital cities. 
3 Which non-Ethiopian capital city is the nearest to Addis Ababa? 
3.1.2 Sizes of Countries of the Horn 
Do you know the largest country in the Horn of Africa? 
The countries of the Horn vary in size, i.e., in area coverage. This variation has 
both advantages and disadvantages for individual countries.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 65
3.1 Location Of The Horn Of Africa And Sizes Of Member Countries 3.2 Location Of The Horn Of Africa And Sizes Of Member Countries
Table 3.1: Comparison of size among countries of the Horn of Africa
Countries of the Horn of Africa Total Area (in km2
)
Dijibouti 23,200
Eritrea 118,000
Ethiopia 1,106,000
Somalia 637,661
Total 1,884,861
Comparatively speaking 
F Ethiopia is the biggest. 
F Djibouti is the smallest. 
F Eritrea and Somalia are less than Ethiopia by almost ten times and 
twice respectively. 
In geography, relative size implies relative possibilities for possessing diversities 
in resources, culture, agro-ecological zones, etc. This concept applies to the 
countries of the Horn. 
The countries should consider these disparities and participate in many forms of 
zonal cooperation in order to benefit one another. 
Activity 3.2
Referring to your Grade 11 geography students’ textbook, answer the following 
questions. 
1 What are the major exports of the countries of the Horn? 
2 Is there a duplication of exportable goods and products? 
3 Do you think that trade among these countries is possible? If not, what barrier 
is there? 
4 Do you remember IGAD? Please discuss what IGAD’s present status is. 
5 Applying your skills in statistical diagramming, show the proportionate size of 
each country. 
Grade 12 Geography 66
3.2 Location, Size And Shape Of Ethiopia
3.2 LOCATION, SIZE AND SHAPE OF ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ demonstrate the relative and absolute location as well as the shape of 
Ethiopia. 
Key Terms
³ Compact ³ Elongated ³ Truncated
 Source: Adapted from School Atlas of Ethiopia
3.2.1 Location of Ethiopia 
Do you know the extent to which the location of a given place is important in 
world politics? What locational significance does Ethiopia have as a country 
that is in the Horn and near the Red sea route? 
In the study of spatial science, location is very significant. Every place has its 
own particular location in relation to its surroundings. Ethiopia’s location can be 
expressed in two ways: relative location and absolute location. 
33ºE 48ºE
0º 0º
3ºN 3ºN
15ºN
EQUATOR
ETHIOPIA
addis ababa
15ºN
Scale 1:15,000,000
Figure 3.5: Location of Ethiopia
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 67
3.2 Location, Size And Shape Of Ethiopia 3.2 Location, Size And Shape Of Ethiopia
Relative Location of Ethiopia
Relative location can be expressed in vicinal and geological terms.
I Relative (Vicinal) Location of Ethiopia
Ethiopia is a landlocked country that is surrounded by five neighboring countries. 
Each country shares different lengths of Ethiopia’s borderlines. The total length 
of Ethiopia’s boundary line is 5260 km. 
Table 3.2: Ethiopia’s boundary line length, as shared with neighboring countries 
S/N Bordering 
Countries
Shared boundaryline length in kms
1 Djibouti 310
2 Eritrea 840
3 Kenya 760
4 Somalia 1600
5 Sudan 1750
Table 3.2 indicates that 
F Sudan shares the longest length of boundary line, followed by Somalia. 
F The Republic of Djibouti shares the smallest boundary line length. 
II Strategic (Global, Geological) Relative Location of Ethiopia
Ethiopia’s geological location can be described in the following ways. It is found: 
F to the southwest of the Asian continent,
F to the south of Europe, 
F to the northwest of the Indian Ocean, 
F in the Nile Basin, and 
F in northeastern Africa.
Absolute (Astronomical) Location of Ethiopia 
Ethiopia’s absolute location is expressed as follows. 
Ethiopia is located between 
F 3o
N – 15o
N latitudes and 33o
E– 48o
E longitudes 
Grade 12 Geography 68
3.2 Location, Size And Shape Of Ethiopia
As a result, Ethiopia’s extreme points lie at 
F Badime in the north (Tigray) 
F Moyalle in the south (Borena) 
F Akobo in the west (Gambella) and 
F The tip of Ogaden in the east (Ogaden). 
Activity 3.3
1 Your teacher will help you and your classmates to form three groups. Each 
group will collect information from different sources:
Â books and documents, 
Â teachers and other knowledgeable people,
Â Internet or Encarta.
2 With your group members, investigate these issues, using the source material 
assigned to your group.
Â The major religions practiced in your locality
Â The place of origin of each of the religions
3 Determine the factors that have influenced the acceptance and practices of 
these religions by millions of Ethiopians. 
3.2.2 Size of Ethiopia 
What is size in terms of spatial distribution? Does size influence the economic 
strength of a country? 
Ethiopia is the tenth largest country in Africa, with a total area of 1,106,000 
square kilometers. It contains about 0.7 percent of the world’s land area and 
about 3.6 percent of Africa’s land mass. 
Table 3.3: Comparison of Ethiopia’s areal size with its neighbors’
Country Total area 
extent (km2
) Rank Size in comparison to 
Ethiopia
Ethiopia 1,106,000 2 −
Djibouti 23,200 6 Almost 50 times smaller
Eretria 118,000 5 9.42 times smaller
Kenya 580,000 4 1.91 times smaller
Somalia 637,661 3 1.73 times smaller
Sudan 2,505,813 1 2.3 times bigger 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 69
3.2 Location, Size And Shape Of Ethiopia 3.2 Location, Size And Shape Of Ethiopia
What advantages and disadvantages does Ethiopia’s large size offer the country? 
Advantages: Ethiopia’s large size lets it: 
F possess diverse agro-ecological zones, resulting in a wide variety of 
fauna and flora, 
F possess a large amount of arable land, 
F have a great variety of mineral resources, and
F be the home of diverse ethnic groups. 
Disadvantages: Its large size compels Ethiopia to: 
F require great financial power to construct infrastructural facilities,
F have a large army to protect its sovereignty, 
F preserve an efficient and popular government to administer its vast 
territory. 
3.2.3 Shape of Ethiopia 
Look at the shape of Ethiopia and the neighbouring countries. Does Ethiopia 
have shape similarity? Can you identify the shape of each neighbouring 
country? 
Countries vary not only in location and size but also in shape. Some have nearly 
circular (compact) shapes, others have elongated (linear) shapes, and still 
others have truncated (shortened) shapes. These shapes affect each country‘s 
administration, defence and economic integration, both within the country and in 
respect to outside areas.
Ethiopia’s shape is of the compact type. Its shape is considered to be compact, 
or essentially circular, because the extreme north-south and east-west spans of 
the country cover comparable distances. You can easily see this approximate 
circularity in your school atlases and wall maps.
Note
Ethiopia is the largest country in the Horn. This status in size, 
in combination with its status of having a large population, 
confers many advantages to Ethiopia in the Horn area.
Grade 12 Geography 70
3.2 Location, Size And Shape Of Ethiopia
There are three theoretical indicators of the compactness of an area:
F the boundary-circumference ratio (B/C) 
F the area-boundary ratio (A/B) 
F the actual area-area of the inscribing circle (A/A')
For example, let’s use the boundary-circumference ratio to measure Ethiopia’s 
degree of compactness or index of compactness. In the ratio, circumference is 
based on an inscribing circle that touches the north, south, east and west boundaries 
of Ethiopia described earlier in the “Absolute (Astronomical) Location” section. 
 r – is not given, we have to find it. 
Then, change the obtained length (7o
30') into kilometers: 
1o = 110.5 km 
7o
30' × 110.5 km = 828.75 km 
Therefore, index of compactness = 
5260 1.01
2 3.14 828.75 = × × 
Note
Each of these theoretical assumptions is based on a value of 
1 as indicating a perfectly compact shape. They consider 0.5 – 
1.5 values as deviating only slightly from circular/compact and 
therefore indicating approximate compactness. In contrast, 
smaller values indicate greater divergence from compactness, 
especially as they approach zero (0). These small values reflect 
tendencies to elongation or truncation. 
Index o f compactness = 
Boundary length
Circumference of the inscribing circle
Note
The inscribing circle is the circle drawn through the extreme 
points on the boundary of Ethiopia. The radius is obtained by 
taking half the length of the distance between the astronomical 
extremes of west and east of Ethiopia i.e., 
48o
E – 33o
E = 15o
/2 = 7o
30’ (this is radius of the inscribing circle).
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 71
3.2 Location, Size And Shape Of Ethiopia 3.2 Location, Size And Shape Of Ethiopia
The value obtained, 1.01, indicates that Ethiopia’s shape to be nearly a perfect 
compact shape. 
The value obtained indicates that Ethiopia’s shape deviates by only 32% from 
being perfectly compact. Therefore, Ethiopia’s shape is closer to the compact 
type than to either of the other shapes. 
 Exercise 3.1 
I Multiple Choice: Choose the appropriate answer from the 
given alternatives. 
1 Ethiopia experiences overhead sun twice in a year. This particular feature 
could be attributed to its 
A geological location 
B vicinal location 
C astronomical location 
D A and B
2 Which neighboring country shares the longest boundary line with Ethiopia? 
A Somali
B Eritrea 
C Sudan
D Djibouti 
3 Which of the following towns is not a border town of Ethiopia? 
A Bademe
B Metema/Galabat
C Moyallee
D Negelle Borena 
4 Which of the following countries of the Horn of Africa does not have an 
outlet to the sea? 
A Eritrea
B Djibouti
C Ethiopia
D Somalia
5 Which of the following geographical phenomena is not related to Ethiopia’s 
astronomical location? 
A relatively high temperatures throughout the year 
B very little annual range of temperature 
C its location within the range of GMT + 3 hours time zone 
D 	its significant role in IGAD
Grade 12 Geography 72
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
3.3 GEOLOGICAL STRUCTURE AND RELIEF 
OF THE HORN OF AFRICA
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Þ explain geological structure and major events of the Horn of Africa; 
Þ describe major landforms of Ethiopia and the Horn;
Þ discuss the general characteristics of Ethiopian rivers and drainage 
patterns; 
Þ classify the Ethiopian lakes as highland and rift valley; 
Þ show appreciation for the significance of rivers and lakes of Ethiopia; 
Þ show interest for the implementation of water-resource conservation and 
management policy.
Key Terms
³ Era 
³ Period 
³ Epoch 
³ Transgression 
³ Regression 
³ Endogenic force
³ Exogenic force 
³ Drainage system 
³ Relief 
³ Geology 
³ Orogenic 
³ Epeirogenic 
3.3.1 Geological History of the Horn of Africa 
Which geological era is significant regarding the formation of the various 
landforms in Ethiopia and the Horn? 
The geological history of the Horn cannot be separated from the geological 
history of Africa. It deals with various geographic activities that have occurred 
for many millions of years in the past. 
The geological history of the Horn shows us that four major geological eras have 
elapsed. Each era is divided into periods, and each period is subdived into epochs.
Each geological era is distinguished from the other’s, based on grounds of the 
following three characteristics: 
F the relative positions of the continents 
F the character of the prevailing climate 
F the predominant life form
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 73
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Summary of Major Geological Events in the Horn
Let’s begin by considering the different geological eras and then study the events 
that took place in those eras. Here are the geological eras, in chronological order. 
F the Precambrian Era – the oldest era (from 4.5 billion years to 600 
million years ago; 
F the Paleozoic Era (from 600 million years to 250 million years ago) 
F the Mesozoic Era (from 250 million years to 70 million years ago) 
F the Cenozoic era (from 70 million years to the recent time) 
The Precambrian Era (from 4.5 Billion to 600 Million years ago) 
What do you understand by the term Precambrian? 
F the Precambrian Era is the oldest and longest geological era, covering 
about 5/6 of the earth’s geological time. The following geological events 
occurred in the Horn during this era. 
F frequent orogenic movements 
F intensive volcanic activities 
F denudation during the later periods 
F formation of folded mountain ranges in a NNE – SSW direction
Today, in a few areas of Ethiopia, outcrops of old crystalline basement complex 
rocks are found on the surface, due to continuous denudation. 
Example: 
F In central and northern Tigray. 
F In Mettekel, Assossa, Illubabor and the Abbay. 
F In central Sidama, southern Omo, southern Bale and Borena. 
F In central, western and northern Eritrea. 
Note
During the Precambrian era
Â The first forms of life emerged, such as amoeba, and 
jellyfish.
Â The oldest rock formed – the old crystalline basement. 
This rock underlies all other rocks.
Grade 12 Geography 74
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
The Paleozoic Era (from 600 Million – 250 Million years ago) 
Which life form was dominant in the Paleozoic era? 
The main geological events of the Paleozoic era were denudation and peneplanation. 
No significant structural formation took place. The massive denudational activity 
resulted in the formation of inselbergs in some parts of Ethiopia and the Horn. 
Mesozoic Era (from 250 Million – 70 Million years ago) an Era of Reptiles
Which life form was dominant in the Mesozoic era? 
The most important geological occurrences of the Mesozoic era in the Horn were 
the sinking and uplifting of the landmass. 
Asmara
SOMALIA
GULF OF ADEN
INDIAN 
OCEAN
RED SEA
KENYA
SUDAN
Harar
Callafo Negheli
Jimma
Gambella
ADDISS ABABA
Dessie
Gondar
GEOLOGY OF THE HORN
Old Basement Rocks
Sedimentary Rocks
Tertiary Lava
Recent volcanic Rocks
Recent sedimentary Rocks 
(Lake and marine deposits)
Figure 3.6: Geological map 
of the Horn 
Note
The Paleozoic era is known for the predominance of 
invertebrates.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 75
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Periods Geological time scale 
Cretaceous 70 m 
Jurassic 142 m
Triassic 250 m
The landmass sank during the Mesozoic’s Triassic and Jurassic periods:
F In the Triassic Period, the landmass sank due to internal forces. This 
event was followed by transgression of a nearby sea into the mainland 
of today’s Somalia, and southeastern Ethiopia. During the Triassic 
Period, the oldest sedimentary rock known as Adigrat sandstone was 
formed. 
F In the Jurassic Period, the transgression of the sea continued into the 
mainland in the northwest direction. This event deposited another 
sedimentary rock known as Hintalo limestone.
F In the Cretaceious Period, the landmass began to rise and the sea started 
to regress towards the southeast, depositing sedimentary rock known as 
Upper Sandstone. Upper Sandstone is the youngest sedimentary rock, 
and therefore overlies the rest.
Because of the direction of the regression and deposition, Upper Sandstone is 
the youngest and thinnest in the southeast, and is the oldest and thickest in the 
northwest.
Focus 
The transgression of the sea extended up to northwestern Ethiopia, as 
far as central Tigray and the western slopes of the western highlands. 
The sedimentary rocks formed in the Mesozoic Era were later buried by 
overlying Cenozoic igneous rocks. However, the sedimentary rocks have 
The Mesozoic Era was an era of sedimentary rock formation in Ethiopia and 
the Horn. 
Â The deposited sandstones vary in age and thickness from the northwest to the southeast direction. 
Â The Adigrat sandstone is older and thicker in the southeast and 
progressively decreases in age and thickness to the northwest.
Grade 12 Geography 76
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
been exposed at the surface in some areas of Ethiopia. They are thinnest 
(because they are the youngest) in the southeast and thickest (because 
they are the oldest) in the northwest.
One can see them exposed at the surface mostly in the south eastern 
lowlands of Ethiopia, central Tigray, and in the Abbay and Wabishebelle 
gorges. (For more information, look at the geological map of Ethiopia.) 
Biological Events of the Mesozoic Era
The Mesozoic is also known for the predominance of reptiles. Huge reptiles, 
such as dinosaurs, were dominant. However, at the end of this era, two other 
significant biological events occurred:
F one was the disappearance of the dinosaurs, and 
F the other was the emergence of mammals, birds and flowering plants. 
The Cenozoic Era (from 70 Million to Recent Years) 
Do you know the era in which the human form of life appeared?
The Cenozoic is the most recent geological era. Very significant structural, 
climatic and biological events have occurred in the Horn. 
In order to make things simple and easily comprehendible, we shall discuss 
only the geological events of this era into events of the Tertiary and Quaternary 
Periods. 
Geologic Events of the Tertiary Period - (70 million - 2 million years ago) 
In the Tertiary Period, the uplifting that began in the Cretaceous Period of the 
Mesozoic Era continued and reached its maximum height. 
In Ethiopia and the Horn it formed huge blocks of dome over the greater part of 
the region. As the uplifting continued through time, great cracks opened in the 
crust and resulted in the pouring out of extensive basaltic lava (known as the 
Trappean lava series). The lava resulted in the formation of:
F The Eritrean Highlands 
F The Northwestern Highlands
F The Southeastern Highlands
F The Somali plateaus
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 77
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
As the cracking continued during the period, it formed the Great East African 
Rift Valley System – of which the Ethiopian Rift Valley System is part.
Geologic Events of the Quaternary Period (2 million - recent years) 
In the Quaternary Period, these structures were formed in Ethiopia and the Horn: 
F The Afar Horst that extends into Djibouti
F The active volcano of Ertalle in Afar
F The dormant volcanic mountain of Fentalle in Eastern Oromia 
F The extensive lava field of Methara.
 
 
Photograph 3.2 Mount Fentalle Photograph 3.3 The Lava field of Methara
Photograph 3.1 Ertalle
Grade 12 Geography 78
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Climatic Events in the Cenozoic Era 
In addition to the geological events that happened in this period, a significant 
change of climate took place in the Horn and Ethiopia. A massive flood, called the 
pluvial period, occurred. This flood formed deep gorges, moraines and lacustrine 
deposits.
Note
One good example of the deep gorges formed as the result of 
the flood is the Abbay gorge.
Photograph 3.4 The Abbay gorge
It is believed that Lake Langano, Lake Abijata and Lake Shalla were 
one sheet of water during the time of the pluvia l period. The same is 
believed true of lakes Abbaya and Chamo. 
Today these lakes are widely separated. 
Note
The Cenozoic Era in its Quaternary Period is assumed to be the 
period in which modern man evolved. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 79
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Activity 3.4
By looking at a geological map of the Horn of Africa, identify the areas where these 
rocks are found on the surface as outcrops: 
a metamorphic rocks 
b sedimentary rocks 
c quaternary lava deposits.
Here is a simplified presentation of the rock profile in Ethiopia and the Horn: 
Quaternary lava (recent lava deposits – 
Aden lava series) 
Tertiary lava deposits 
Cenozoic era Igneous rocks of 
various periods
Upper Sandstone (Cretaceous) 
Hintalo Limestone (Jurassic) 
Adigrat SandStone (Triassic) 
Mesozoic Era sedimentary rocks 
of different periods
Basement complex or old crystalline 
rock
Basement complex rock of the 
Precambrian Era
 Exercise 3.2
I Choice 
1 Which of the following geological events did not occur during the 
Quaternary period? 
A the uplifting of the Suez landmass 
B the occurrence of the pluvial rain 
C the emergence of modern man 
D the formation of the Ethiopian Rift Valley
2 The Paleozoic is an era of: 
A significant structural formation 
B peneplanation and denudation 
C uplifting in the central part of Ethiopia 
D the dominance of reptiles 
Grade 12 Geography 80
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
3 We cannot observe the outcropping basement complex rocks in one of the 
following areas of Ethiopia: 
A in central Tigray
B around Assossa
C in the Abbay gorge
D in central Shoa 
4 As Adigrat sandstone is to Triassic, Hintalo limestone is to 
A Permian
B Cambrian 
C Cretaceous
D Jurassic 
5 The Mesozoic old marine deposits are today extensively found in which 
A Northern and western Tigray 
B Western Benishangul 
C The Ogaden and Elkerie lowlands 
D Western Gojjam 
6 The most overlying rock in Ethiopia is the 
A The cenozoic/igneous deposit 
B Adigrat sandstone 
C Old crystalline basement complex 
D Upper sandstone 
7 Below, four sets of Ethiopian geological events are listed. Which one is in 
correct chronological order? 
A The formation of the old crystalline rock, Adigrat sandstone, Hintalo 
limestone, upper sandstone and the Aden volcanic deposits 
B The formation of metamorphic rock, the Rift Valley, the Afar Horst 
and igneous rock 
C The deposition of the Trappean lava series, the pluvial rains, the 
formation of Adigrat sandstone 
D The formation of Adigrat sandstone, Hintalo limestone, Upper 
Sandstone and Metamorphic rock
8 Which geological era is known as an era of amphibians? 
A Precambrain
B Paleozoic
C Cenozoic
D Mesozoic 
9 One can associate the Mesozoic Era with the formation of 
A Igneous rock
B Metamorphic rock
C Sedimentary rock
D A and B
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 81
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
II Match the items in Column B with those in Column A.
A B
10 Lacustrine deposits 
11 Fluvial deposits
12 Pluvial rains
13 Old crystalline basement rock
14 Aden lava series
15 Marine deposits
16 Horst
17 Rift Valley 
18 Orogenic movement
19 Epeiroginic movement
A Deposits of sediments by rivers 
along their banks 
B Deposits of sediments by lakes 
C Heavy rain that occurred during the 
Quaternary period following the 
last Ice Age 
D The most underlying rock in 
Ethiopia and the Horn 
E Part of the surface of the earth that 
submerges due to tectonic activities 
F The type of tectonic activity that is 
horizontal and often forms folds 
G Type of tectonic activity which is 
associated with uplifting or sinking 
of rocks
H An epeirogenic effect resulting in 
the formation of mountains and the 
like 
I Quaternary lava deposits along the 
Afar Triangle 
J Deposits of sediments by sea 
3.3.2 Landforms of Ethiopia and the Horn 
Figure 3.7: The Relief of 
the Horn of Africa
Gulf of Eden
Grade 12 Geography 82
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Focus 
Lake Tana is found in the physiographic subdivision between the plains of 
Foggera in the southeast and Dembia in the north. 
Look at the relief map of the Horn of Africa. It shows high mountains and 
extensive lowlands mostly found at the coasts and the Great East African Rift 
Valley that diagonally bisects the region and stretches to East Africa. 
These landforms are the work of two opposite forces: 
F The endogentic force that originates from inside the earth. For example, 
volcanic activity and tectonic forces. 
F The exogenic force that originates at the surface (denudation and 
penepalantion). 
It is a combination of these two forces that created the existing landforms of the 
Horn of Africa. 
Have you had opportunities to travel to the different regions of Ethiopia? If 
you did, what did you notice along your routes? 
If you have not had those opportunities, make an educational tour of your 
surroundings with your geography teacher. Then write a short report on what you 
observe. 
The landforms of Ethiopia and the Horn are made up of river-cut gorges, valleys, 
plateaus, mountains and rolling plains. These landforms are the results of exogenic 
and endogenic forces that have acted alternately and, at times, simultaneously or 
the last sixty million years 
Altitude varies from about 116 meters below sea level at the Dallol depression 
(Kobar sink) to 4620 meters above sea level at Ras Dashen in Semein. Between 
these extreme points lie a number of mountains. If 1000 meters is chosen as 
a demarcating contour line between highlands and lowlands, 56 percent of 
Ethiopia’s land is highland. This fact has given Ethiopia the name “Roof 
of Northeastern Africa.” It is the only country in the region with such a high 
proportion of elevated surface. This elevated surface is bisected diagonally by the 
Rift Valley which extends from Syria to Mozoambique across the East African 
lakes. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 83
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
In terms of the geological and structural features that resulted from the two types 
of forces, the relief of Ethiopia and the Horn can be divided into three main 
physiographic divisions: 
Â Highlands 
Â The Rift Valley 
Â The lowlands 
The Highlands of the Horn
Highlands are lands with altitudes of over 1000 meters above sea level (masl).
The Horn’s highlands are:
1 The Northwestern Highlands
2 The Southeastern Highlands 
1 The Northwestern Highlands of the Horn 
Have you ever had a chance to go to Bahrdar, Gondar, etc.? 
The Northwestern Highlands of the Horn stretch from Ras Kassar in Eritrea to 
the highlands of Gamo-Goffa in southwestern Ethiopia. They are separated from 
the southeastern highlands by the Rift Valley, which is part of the Great East 
African Rift Valley. They consist of:
Â The Plateau of Eritrea 
Â The Plateau of Tigray 
Â The North Central Massifs 
Â The Plateau of Shewa
Â The Southwestern Highlands 
The Plateau of Eritrea 
Are the Eritrean plateaus extensions of the Ethiopian plateaus? 
The plateau of Eritrea is located between the course of the Barka River and the 
coastal plain of Eritrea. It is bisected by the upper basin of the Mereb River. The 
plateau is capped by basaltic rocks. 
Grade 12 Geography 84
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
The Plateau of Tigray 
Is the plateau of Tigray contemporary to the other plateaus of Ethiopia? 
The Plateau of Tigray is the most northerly plateau in Ethiopia. It is separated 
from the Eritrean plateau by the Mereb River. It lies to the southeast of the upper 
course of the Mereb/Gash River and to the northeast of Tekkeze River Gorge. 
It is an area composed largely of sandstones and limestones, as the overlying 
basalt have been eroded. As a result, the soils are poor and thin. The plateau has 
been exposed to severe erosion due to long periods of human inhabitation. 
There are very high mountains on this plateau with elevations of over 3000 meters 
above sea level. Three of these are: 
F Mount Tsibet – 3988 m.a.s.l 
F Mount Ambalage – 3291 m.a.s.l 
F Mount Assimba – 3248 m.a.s.l
The North-Central Massifs
What makes the Northern central massifs distinct from the massifs of central 
Ethiopia? 
These are the most rugged and dissected plateaus of Ethiopia. They are capped 
by basalts and surrounded by deep gorges. Within each of the plateaus are small 
arable lands known as ambas. The ambas are isolated from one another by gorges. 
The Tekezze, together with its tributaries, is the main river that drains the region. 
Tekezze River has divided the North Central Massif area into western and eastern 
massifs, which are connected by the Yejju-Wadla-Dilanta plateau. The western 
massifs make up the massifs of South Gondar (Semein), while the eastern ones 
make up the Lasta and Wollo Massifs. South of these is found the Gojjam Massif. 
The Semein Massif is dominated by Ras Dashen, while the eastern forms the 
watershed of the Nile drainage basin. 
The Gojjam Massif is the most extended tableland and is comparatively less 
dissected. It is formed on the core of the Amedamit-Choke mountains. It is 
carved by the Abbay river that effectively separated it from the Shewa plateau in 
the south and the Amahara Saynt Massif in the northeast. 
The North-Central Massifs are made up of numerous high mountains. They are 
known for the production of cereals, such as teff, pulses and oil seeds. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 85
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Famous mountain peaks on these massifs are 
F MT. RAS DASHEN (in Semein) – 4620 masl
F MT. LEGEDA (in Gondar) – 4532 masl
F MT. ANALU (in Gondar) – 4480 masl
F MT. TEFAW LEZER (in Gondar) – 4456 masl
F MT. KOLO (in Lasta) – 4300 masl 
F MT. GUNA (in Gondar) – 4231 masl
F MT. ABUNA YOSEPH (in Lasta) – 4190 masl
F MT. HEY (in Gondar) – 4154 masl 
F MT. BIRHAN (in Gojjam) – 4100 masl
The Plateau of Shewa
Have you ever had the opportunity to travel from Addis Ababa to Debre Markos 
or Bahir Dar? If yes, what do you recognize all the way through until you 
reach the Abbay Gorge? 
The Shoan Plateau is a dome-shaped plateau that serves as a watershed between 
the Awash and Abbay River basins. It extends westwards into western Wellega 
through Horo Guduru and forms a crescent shape which causes the Abbay to 
swerve and drain northwards. The Shoan plateau is separated 
F from the plateau of Gojjam by the Abbay gorge in the north
F from the southeastern highlands by the Awash River and the Rift Valley. 
F from the Highlands of Keffa by the Ghibe River. 
The Plateau of Shewa is drained by the tributaries of the Abbay River in the west 
and the Awash River in the east. Its high mountains are found on its northeastern 
and south eastern margins; they are: 
F Mt. Abbuye Meda (on the northeastern margin) – 4000 masl 
F Mt. Guraghe (on the southeastern margin) – 3721 masl 
The Southwestern Highlands of the Horn
Which regional zones are found in the southwestern highlands of the Horn? 
These include the highland areas of Wellega, Illubabor, Gamo Goffa and Keffa. 
These Ethiopian highlands lie south of the Abbay trough which is greatly eroded 
due to torrential rain that pours down on in the area for almost all of the year. It 
is the wettest region of the country with a total average annual rainfall of above 
1500 mm. 
Grade 12 Geography 86
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
The region is drained: 
F northwards, by the Dabus and Diddeessa tributaries of the Abbay River
F westwards, by the headstreams of the Baro-Akobo River 
F southwards, by the Omo-Ghibe River, which ends in Lake Turkana 
F eastwards, by the right-bank tributaries of the Omo-Ghibe (the GojebGhibe River of Jima and Yem zone) 
The general elevation of these highlands is relatively low, when compared to that 
of the Northern and Eastern Highlands. Only a few areas are above 2500 meters. 
The highest points in the region are the: 
F Gamo-Konso Highlands (in GamoGoffa) 
F Maji-Korma Highlands (in Keffa Zone) 
F Kulo-Konta Highlands (Keffa zone) 
F Benishangul mountain (in Benshangul Gumuz) 
F Tullu Wallel (in West Wellega) 
Mt Gughe has the highest altitude: 4200 masl. It is found in the Gammo plateau. 
The Southeastern Highlands of the Horn
Can you suggest what feature separates these highlands from the northwestern 
highlands? 
Which highlands are said to be the components of southeastern highlands of 
the Horn? 
The Southeastern Highlands of the Horn include the plateaus of
Â Hararghe 
Â Sidama 
Â Arsi 
Â Bale 
Â Somali highlands 
Their formation is similar to that of the North and Southwestern Highlands; and 
they are capped by basaltic rock. They are the main sources of the Wabishebelle 
and Genalle rivers. 
Note
These highlands are well-known for the production of coffee, 
inset and maize. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 87
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
They are bounded: 
F in the west, by the fault line of the Rift Valley 
F in the east, by the Ogaden Lowlands 
F in the south by the Elkerie and Borena Lowlands. 
These highlands are subdivided into the plateaux of Hararghe, Arsi, Bale and 
Sidama. Each is discussed in turn as follows. 
The Plateau of Hararghe 
The Plateau of Hararghe rises sharply from the fault line of the Rift Valley and 
extends gently to the east up to Jijiga. After Jijiga, a fall in elevation takes place, 
giving way to the Ogaden Lowlands. The Plateau is drained by the left-bank 
tributaries of the Wabishebelle River. The basaltic rocks have been worn away, 
exposing limestones and earlier sedimentary rocks. 
The Hararge Plateau area and its foothills are significant producers of coffee,
chat, sorghum and millet. The highest points of this plateau are Mount Gara 
Muleta (3381 masl) and Mount Jebel Tita (3122 masl). 
The Plateau of Arsi
This plateau area consists of the Gugu and Chillalo Massifs. It is an extendingly 
rolling plateau; it is a very suitable plateau for farming. These features are due 
to the fact that erosion on the Arsi plateau has been comparatively low. The Arsi 
plateau is known for its wheat. 
The highest points on the Arsi plateau are Mount Chillallo (4136 masl), Mount 
Bada (4139 masl) and Mount Kaka (4180 masl).
The Bale Massif
The Bale Massif is next to the Arsi Plateau but is separated from it by the 
headstreams of the Wabishebelle River (popularly known as the Wabe). In the 
north, the massif consists of a flat form that is similar to basaltic plateaus. In the
south, the massif consists of huge mountains. The Bale Massif is dominated by 
F Mount Tulu Dimtu (4377 masl) 
F Mount Batu (4307 masl) 
The Plateau of Sidama 
This plateau area is next to the Bale Massifs, but is separated from them by the 
Genalle River. The area constitutes the southwest extension of the southeastern 
highlands. The plateau slopes away gently to the south and is drained by the 
Dawa River and its tributaries. The Jemjem is the dominant part of the plateau.
Grade 12 Geography 88
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
The Somali Highlands 
The highlands are the extension of the southeastern highlands of Ethiopia. Their 
average altitude doesn’t exceed 1500 masl. They rise gently in the west and 
descend sharply to the Indian Ocean coasts. 
The Rift Valley System 
What is the difference between a river valley system and a rift valley system? 
Can you give examples? 
The Ethiopian Rift Valley System is part of the Horn’s Rift Valley System, which 
is part of the Great East African Rift System. The Great East African Rift System 
is a set of fractures in the earth’s crust that extend from the Dead Sea in the north, 
through the Red Sea, and then across East and Central Africa to Mozambique in 
the south. 
Major faulting and rifting took place at the end of the Tertiary Period of the 
Pleistocene Epoch as a result of tectonic epeirogenic activity. These events 
formed the Great East African Rift System. 
Let’s now consider the Ethiopian Rift Valley System. It has been the scene of 
intense volcanic activity and minor faulting. Even today, active volcanic activity 
exists there. It is therefore, the most unstable physiographic division of the area. 
As you can see in the following map, the Rift Valley runs diagonally from 
northeast to southwest and divides Ethiopia east-to-west. It covers a total length 
of 1700 kilometers in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Afar Triangle
Figure 3.8: The Rift Valley 
System of Ethiopia 
and the Horn
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 89
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Focus 
From an economic point of view, the Afar Triangle is becoming increasingly 
significant for its great potential in the extraction of salt, geothermal energy 
and irrigable agriculture. 
Subdivisions of the Ethiopian Rift Valley System
Can you forward the main natural/physical factors that make up the subdivisions 
of the Ethiopian Rift Valley? 
Covering a length of 1700 km, the Ethiopian Rift Valley System comprises 18 
percent of the country’s total area. It is subdivided into three main parts: 
Â The Afar Triangle (northern) 
Â The Main Ethiopian Rift (central) 
Â The Chew-Bahir Rift (southern) 
The Afar Triangle (Northern Subdivision) 
The northern subdivision of the Ethiopian Rift Valley System, i.e., the Afar 
Triangle, is the largest and widest part of the system. Its altitude is generally low, 
ranging from 116 meters below sea level at the Kobar Sink to about 900 meters 
above sea level at Awash. 
This part of the Ethiopian Rift System is characterized by 
F faulted depressions (the Dallol Depression) and grabens (also called 
troughs) 
F volcanic mountains.
Also, a large part of the area is covered by extensive salt plains and lakes (Lake 
Assale and Lake Afrera). 
The Afar triangle is bounded by parallel fault lines on the east and west. Its floor
is made up of: 
F grabens such as the Tendaho Graben 
F volcanic ash and lava deposits 
F Lacustrian and fluvial deposits, and 
F Volcanic mountains such as Mount Fentalle. 
Grade 12 Geography 90
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
What is more, the Afar Triangle has special characteristics that do not exist 
in other regions of Ethiopia do not bear. It consists of: 
K fossil rich sediments 
K rich archeological sites which have shown us that the area was the 
home of the ancient ancestors of primates and hominids. 
The Main Ethiopian Rift (Lake Region or Central Part) 
F The central subdivision of the Ethiopian Rift system, i.e., the Main 
Ethiopian Rift, covers the area from the lower Awash basin up to Lake 
Chamo. This subdivision is the most elevated part of the Ethiopian Rift 
Valley. It is also the wettest, most densely vegetated, and most densely 
populated. 
F Sedentary farming is practiced here. The area also includes numerous 
lakes of enormous aesthetic value. 
The Chew-Bahir Rift (Southern Subdivision) 
The southern subdivision of the Ethiopian Rift system, the Chew-Bahir Rift, is 
also known as the Omo-Ghibe trough. It is the smallest section of the Ethiopian 
Rift System. It consists of an extensive shallow marshy area covered by tall 
grasses. 
In the vicinity of Arba Minch, this part of the Ethiopian Rift valley system is split 
into the Ganjuli and the Galena Valleys by the Amaro mountain range. 
Activity 3.5
1 Draw a map of the Rift Valley System in Ethiopia and demarcate its subdivisions. 
2 For each subdivision, show two important towns.
The Lowlands of the Horn
These landform divisions occupy the peripheries of Ethiopia on its eastern and 
western sides, running from north to south. They are generally below the 1000 
meter contour line and have relatively harsh and very hot climates. The lowlands 
constitute more than 35 percent of the total area of the country. They are inhabited 
mainly by pastoralists. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 91
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
The lowlands of the Horn are subdivided into 
Â Western lowlands Â Southeastern lowlands
The Western Lowlands 
These lowlands extend from western Eritrea in the north up to the Omo-Ghibe 
River in the south, bordering the Sudan. They have a general elevation of 500 – 
1000 masl. 
These lowlands are sub-divided into 
F The Setit and Barka Lowlands (in Eritrea) 
F The Tekezze and Angereb Lowlands (in Tigray and Amhara regions) 
F The Abbay Dinder Lowlands (in Benishangul and the Gumuz Region) 
F The Baro-Akobo Lowlands (in Gambella) 
F The Omo-Ghibe Lowlands (in SNNP) 
The Western Lowlands are characterized by arid and semi–arid conditions. The 
Baro-Akobo lowland is the wettest lowland. 
Because of climatic hardship in most parts of these lowlands, the communities 
practice nomadic and semi-nomadic pasturalist ways of life. However, there are 
notable towns, such as Humera, Kurmuk, Omedla and Metema, that serve as 
business centers for the communities living along the Ethio-Sudanese border. 
The Southeastern Lowlands 
Like the Western Lowlands, the Northeastern and Southeastern Lowlands run 
from northwest to southeast. They begin in Djibouti and run all the way to 
Somalia in the southeast, bordering the Indian Ocean. They consist of 
F the Red Sea coastal plains (in Eritrea) 
F the Afar plains (in Afar) which are included in the Afar Triangle. 
F the Ogaden plains (in Somali region) 
F the Elkeri plains (in Bale) 
F the Borena plains (in Oromiya) 
F the Benadir plains (in Somalia) 
F Djibouti
Grade 12 Geography 92
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
These lowlands are highly extensive lowlands. They are characterized by low 
annual rainfall-often below 500 mm. Most of these lowlands are covered by 
sandstones and recent marine deposits. The people practice a pastoralist way of 
life because of the harsh climate. 
Activity 3.6
1 Draw a map of Ethiopia showing the major physiographic divisions. 
2 Name three very important towns for each division. 
3 Briefly explain the current economic significance of each division and, if you 
can, predict its future prospects. 
4 Explain why the Baro-Akobo Lowlands are the wettest of all lowlands. 
 Exercise 3.3 
I Tell whether the following statements are true or false. 
1 All the highlands of Ethiopia are the result of tectonic activity.
2 The Plateau of Shewa is a dome-shaped plateau with a crescent shape at 
the center.
3 The Southwestern Highlands are lower in altitude than the other highlands 
of Ethiopia. 
4 The plateaus of Semein, Lasta and Wollo are the most dissected and rugged 
subdivisions. 
5 The Plateau of Shewa is one of the sources for the water that flows to the 
Abbay
6 Lake Tana lies between the plateaus of Gojjam and Southern Gondar and 
has a crater shape. 
II Choose the best answer among the suggested alternatives. 
7 The plateau of Tigray is separated from the plateau of Eritrea by the 
A Tekezze River
B Mereb River
C Tributaries of the Setit River
D The Danakil Lowlands 
8 The difference in altitude between the lowest and highest point in Ethiopia is 
A 4736 meters
B 4504 meters
C 4760 meters
D 4620 meters 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 93
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
9 As the highest point is in the Semein, the lowest point is in the 
A Western margins
B Elkere Lowlands
C Afar Lowlands
D Ogaden Lowlands 
10 Imagine that you could travel in a straight line from Ras Dashen to the 
Dallol Depresion. You would encounter all of the following features except 
for one or two. Identify the exception(s). 
A The Rift Valley escarpments 
B The Lasta Massif 
C The Tekezze gorge 
D Lakes Shalla and Abijata
11 Which one of the following mountains is found to the north of Lake Tana 
Basin? 
A Mount Guna
B Mount Abuna Yoseph
C Mt. Abuye Medda
D Mt. Ras Dashen 
12 Mt. Kolo is found in 
A Semein
B Lasta 
C Amahara Saint
D Gojjam 
13 The most extended tableland in the northern part of Ethiopia is the plateau of 
A Shoa 
B Gojjam
C Southern Gondar 
D Tigray 
14 Which one of the following appears to be different from the others? 
A The Choke-Amedamit mountains 
B The Gamo-Konso Highlands 
C The Maji-Korma Highlands 
D The Kullo-Konta Highlands 
15 Which one of the following areas is not drained by the tributaries of the 
Tekezze? 
A Southwest Wello
B Southern Tigray
C Semein
D Northern Shewa 
16 All of the following are drained by the Abbay and its tributaries, except, 
A The Southwestern Highlands 
B The North and Western Highlands 
C The Central Highlands 
D The Southeastern Highlands 
Grade 12 Geography 94
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
III Short Answers 
17 Tell why sandstone and limestone are seen as surface outcrops in the 
Plateau of Tigray. 
18 Assume that you are travelling from the Dallol Depression to Mt. Ambalage 
in a straight line. Create a graph of your trip using the x–y axis. The x–axis 
represents the travel line. The y axis represents elevation variation. Let 
point O be your origin, in distance. Let D stands for Dallol and point M 
stand for Mt. Ambalage. 
3.3.3 Drainage Systems and Water Resources 
of Ethiopia 
Are drainage systems and drainage patterns alike? What is Ethiopia’s status 
with regard to water resources? 
In geography, drainage patterns differ from drainage systems. The term patterns
refers to the fabric or surface arrangement of the main rivers and their tributaries. 
These features are the result of factors of the underlying rock and slope. In 
contrast, the term systems refers to the direction and destination of the rivers. 
For example, drainage patterns are expressed as radial, dendrite, trellis, etc., 
while drainage systems are expressed as endoric, exotric and aeric. 
The drainage patterns and systems of Ethiopia are the results of various structural 
events that took place in the Cenozoic era. 
Major Rivers of Ethiopia and their Characteristics
Do you know the major rivers of Ethiopia? 
Ethiopia is among the few countries that have many rivers. Ethiopia has 
enormous potential water resources. As well as being numerous, Ethiopian rivers 
are energetic. They flow from the highlands of the interior to the peripheral 
lowlands and then to seas and lakes bouncingly. These conditions have made 
Ethiopia known as the “water tower of Northeastern Africa” and as the watershed 
between the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean drainage systems. 
Characteristics of Ethiopian Rivers 
Are all Ethiopian rivers perennial and non-fluctuating in their volume of 
water? 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 95
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Ethiopian rivers are characterized by: 
F steep profiles; they arise from very high places and flow to the country’s 
borders across lowlands. 
F they gush through rapids and waterfalls along their courses. 
F they show seasonal fluctuation in water volume. 
F they run through steep-sided river valleys and gorges. 
F they serve as boundaries, both international and domestic (administrative 
units). 
Focus 
Some of the Ethiopian rivers are given new names after they cross the 
country’s borders. 
Examples: 
F River Abbay becomes Bue Nile in the Sudan. 
F River Tekezze becomes River Athbara in the Sudan. 
F River Ghenalle becomes River Juba in Somalia. 
F River Baro becomes River Sobat in the Sudan.
Table 3.4: Major rivers of Ethiopia and their tributaries 
Rivers 
Catchment 
area (km2
)
Length in km Major Tribitaries Inside Outside Total
Wabishebelle 205,407 1340 660 2000
Ramis, Erer, Dakata, 
Fafen, Yerer, Gobelle, 
Galleti, Mojo 
Abbay 198,508 800 560 1360
Dabus, Didessa Fincha, 
Guder, Muger, Jemma, 
Beshillo, Shinta, Dinder
Ghenalle 168,141 480 570 1050 Dawa, Weyb, Welmel, 
Mena
Awash 113,709 1200 - 1200 Akaki, Kessem, 
Borkena, Mille 
Tekkezze 87,733 608 560 1,168 Tirari, Anghereb, 
Ghiba, Guang 
Ghibe/Omo 77,205 760 - 760 Gojeb, Gelgel Ghibe
Baro 75,718 227 280 507 Akobo, Gilo 
Sources: Grade 12 Geography Students text, 2006.
Grade 12 Geography 96
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Drainage Systems of Ethiopia
What natural factor influences the drainage systems of Ethiopia? Where do 
most rivers of Ethiopia end? 
The drainage systems of Ethiopia are basically divided into three major groups: 
Â The Western (Mediterranean) drainage system 
Â The Southeastern (Indian Ocean) drainage system 
Â The Inland (Rift Valley) drainage system
The Western (Mediterranean) Drainage System 
This system is the largest of all, both in aerial extent and volume of water 
outflow. It contributes sixty percent of the country’s total annual water discharge. 
It consists of three major rivers and their tributaries: 
F River Tekezze – This river drains the massifs of western Lasta, northern 
Gondar/ Semein and southwestern, western and central Tigray. 
F River Abbay – This one has its origin in the Gojjam plateau. A large 
number of streams join the river from the plateaus of western Shoa, 
southwestern Wello, northern Wollega, and northern Illubabor. 
THE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS OF ETHIOPIA
Tekezze
Baro-Akobo
Omo-Ghibe
Awash
Wabishebelle
Genalle
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Abbay
The Mediterranean Drainage System
The Rift Valley Drainage System
The Indian Ocean Drainage System
I
II
III
Source: Wubushet (2008)
I
II
III
2
5
7
6
3
4
1
Figure 3.9: Drainage Systems of Ethiopia
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 97
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
It has a semicircular course from Lake Tana, separating southeastern 
Gondar from Gojjam and separating Gojjam from Shewa. 
F River Baro-Akobo – This water course drains the wettest highlands of 
the southwest and crosses the border to join the Nile.
The Southeastern Drainage System 
Where do the rivers in this drainage system finally end? Which highlands are 
the main source of the rivers flowing in this drainage system? 
This system is the second largest drainage system. It consists of the Genalle 
and Wabishebelle. These rivers collect waters from the highlands of Hararghe, 
Sidamo, Bale and Arsi. This drainage system flows southeast, across the Somali 
arid and semi-arid areas. It contributes about 32% of the country’s total annual 
water flow. 
The Wabishebelle, the longest river in the country, does not reach the Indian 
Ocean. It ends at the Benadir coast of Somalia. The Ghenalle, on the other hand, 
reaches the Indian Ocean. It joins the Dawa River at the Ethio-Somalia border, 
where it acquires the name Juba. 
The Inland (Rift Valley) Drainage System 
What do you know about the term in-land drainage system? 
This system is the smallest of the three systems in terms of catchment area, 
discharge of water and volume of water. There are a number of lakes and smaller 
streams, like the Bilate and Gedabo, which flow into Lake Abbaya; the Segan, 
which flows into Chew Bahir; and the Meki and the Katar, which flow into Lake 
Ziway. The major rivers in this drainage system are the Awash and the OmoGhibe.
Photograph 3.5 Abbay River
Grade 12 Geography 98
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
The Awash River basin is the most utilized in the Rift Valley. The basin covers a 
total area of 110 thousand square kilometers and serves as home to 10.5 million 
inhabitants. 
The river rises from the Shewan plateau near Ginchi town, a town at about 100 
kilometers west of Addis Ababa, and flows along the Rift Valley. It terminates 
in the salty lake of Abbe on the border with Djibouti. The middle and lower 
courses are part of the Great Rift Valley system (the upper course is not part of 
the system). The lower Awash River basin comprises the deltaic alluvial plains of 
the Tendaho, Assaita, and Dit Behri areas, and of the terminal lakes area. 
F The Omo-Ghibe Basin in southwestern Ethiopia is filled with water and 
sediments carried by the rivers from the highlands. 
Activity 3.7
1 Draw a map of Ethiopia and divide it into the three drainage systems. 
2 Identify the drainage pattern that prevails in each of the three drainage systems. 
3 Your teacher will help you and your fellow students to form three groups – one 
group for each of the drainage systems of Ethiopia. In your group, write down 
every development-based project of the basin to which you are assigned for. 
Then present your findings to the class.
Photograph 3.6 The Awash River
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 99
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Lakes of Ethiopia 
Does Ethiopia have many lakes when compared to other African countries? 
Compared to other countries, Ethiopia is rich in lakes. They are found dispersed 
on the plateaus and clustered in the Rift Valley. 
Most of the lakes are the result of structures that occurred during the Quaternary 
Period; i.e., they are not outcomes of climate. This fact is proved by the location 
of these lakes in the drier parts of the country. The natural lakes found in Ethiopia 
can be classified into highland and Rift Valley lakes. 
Highland Lakes
These lakes are found dispersed on the plateaus, either as crater or watershed 
lakes. These types of lakes resulted from different types of structural formations. 
A crater lake is formed after an explosive volcano breaks a mountain open, 
leaving a deep mouth. The mouth is filled with water – from either small streams 
or subterranean sources. 
A watershed lake is formed when a sheet of lava dams up a shallow surface 
depression. For example, Lake Tana was formed during the Quaternary Period, 
when a sheet of flowing lava dammed the shallow depression that had already 
been formed between the Gojjam and Gondar massifs. 
Example:
Crater lakes in Ethiopia: 
F Bishoftu, Kuruftu, Babbo Gaya, and Arsedi, all around Bishoftu
F Wonchi and Dendi around Ambo, Ginchi and Wellisso 
F Zequala near Bishoftu
F Hashenge near Korum in Tigray
F Haik, (some 30 kilometers away from Desse on the road to Woldiya 
Grade 12 Geography 100
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
 
 
 Lake Wonchi 
 Lake Bishoftu 
 Lake Shalla
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 101
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Rift Valley Lakes 
What is the structural difference between crater lakes and Rift Valley lakes? 
Unlike the highland lakes, the Rift Valley lakes are clustered. They are found in 
a linear pattern along the floor of the Rift Valley. 
Source: Grade 12 Geography Students text, 2000.
 Lake Zequala
1
2
3 4
5
6
7
9
8
LAKES KEY
1 LAKE ABBE
2 LAKE ZIWAY
3 LAKE ABIJATA
4 LAKE LANGANO
5 LAKE SHALLA
6 LAKE HAWASSA
7 LAKE ABAYA
8 LAKE CHAMO
9 LAKE CHEW BAHIR
Figure 3.10: Major Rift valley lakes of Ethiopia
Grade 12 Geography 102
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Table 3.5: Depth, area and location of Ethiopian lakes 
Lakes Area (km2
) Maximum 
depth (meters) Location 
Tana 3,600 9 Highland 
Abaya 1,160 13 Rift Valley 
Chamo 551 10 Rift Valley
Ziway 434 4 Rift Valley
Shalla 409 266 Rift Valley
Langano 230 46 Rift Valley
Hawassa 229 10 Rift Valley
Abijatta 205 14 Rift Valley
Haik 35 23 Highland
Hashenge 20 25 Highland
Source Grade 12 Geography Students text, 2006
Significance of Ethiopian Lakes and Rivers 
Economic Functions of Ethiopia’s Lakes and Rivers
What do you know about the concept of economic function? Are there rivers 
and lakes in Ethiopia that have non-economic functions? 
Lakes and rivers are Ethiopia’s main water resources. Their usefulness is measured 
in terms of their significance to current and planned economic development 
projects. Ethiopia’s level of technology is a significant factor for developing 
these economic resources.
Here is a list of some important functions of Ethiopia’s lakes and rivers.
F They are the main source of hydroelectric power (H.E.P.) supplies for 
the country 
Example:
River Ghibe – Gilgel Gibbe – 1, 2 and 3 H.E.P. plants
River Awash – Awash 1, 2 and 3 H.E.P. project 
Rivber Fincha – Fincha H.E.P. project,
F They are also the country’s main source of fish. 
Example:
Lake Chamo. Lake Abbay, Lake Tana, River Baro, etc
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 103
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
F They are again very important water sources for irrigation. 
Example:
River Awash is the most utilized in this regard; this is because of the 
flat plains it crosses for hundreds of kilometers. 
F What is more, one river provides transportation services. 
Example:
The River Baro is the only river in Ethiopia used for transportation. 
Activity 3.8
Make an educational trip to a nearby river or stream with your teacher and perform 
these tasks: 
a Determine how far the river or stream is from your school, in kilometers.
b Draw a sketch map of the stream or river area. Then, answer the following 
questions: 
i does the stream or river have a steep profile? 
ii is it of a gentle profile? 
iii do the local people use the river for small scale irrigation purposes such 
as growing vegetables? How? 
iv if so, how? If not, why not? Present the case to your teacher and discuss it. 
Photograph 3.7 Cotton plantation served by Irrigation
Grade 12 Geography 104
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Ethiopia’s lakes and rivers provide recreation resorts and aesthetic value. They 
are also important sources of the nation’s fish.
Their scenic beauty emanates the rich variety of birds, fish and other wildlife,
spectacularly deep gorges, waterfalls of all description and the mists these 
produce. These panoramic features win the affection of the Ethiopian people 
and tourists and are sites of the country’s best recreational resorts. The economic 
potential of these scenic resources is enormous but is still not well developed.
3.3.4 Water-Resource Conservation and 
Management in Ethiopia 
Why do we conserve water resources? Are our water resources running out? 
How do they support our existing needs? Are policy measures the correct 
solution to problems? 
As you know, Ethiopia has been known as the “Water Tower of Northeastern 
Africa” for the last fifty to sixty years. Ethiopia is the second richest African 
country in terms of water-resource potential, following the Democratic Republic 
of Congo. However, 
F drought is recurring every 3 to 5 years. 
F some highland lakes are disappearing or are on the verge of disappearance.
Example:
Lake Haromaya in Hararghe zone and Lake Cheleklektu in Bishoftu. 
F the volume and purity of Ethiopia’s rivers is decreasing. Pollutants are 
increasingly contaminating the country’s water resources.
F due to the rapid growth of human population, there is a crucial growing 
demand for potable water.
These and other factors have led to the need for the conservation and management 
of water resources in Ethiopia. In response to this need, the Federal Democratic 
Republic of Ethiopia has adopted a national conservation strategy for natural 
resources under the Ethiopian Environmental Protection Authority. The Authority 
has developed policy goals, objectives and guiding principles. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 105
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
Overall Policy Goals 
The overall policy goals are: 
F improve and enhance the health and quality of life of all Ethiopians 
F promote sustainable social and economic development through sound 
management and use of 
K natural, human-made and cultural resources 
K the environment 
F perform these tasks in a manner that meets the needs of the present 
generation without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs. 
Policy Goals Related to Water Resources 
In relation to water resources, the goals of the Ethiopian Environmental Protection 
Authority are:
F ensure that the control of environmental health hazards is a necessary 
condition in the design, constitution and use of dams and irrigation 
systems.
F recognize that natural ecosystems, particularly wetlands and upstream 
forests, are fundamental for regulating water quality and quantity, 
and integrate their rehabilitation and protection into the construction, 
development and management of water resources. 
F ensure that any proposed introduction of exotic species into water 
ecosystems as subject to detailed studies and environmental-impact 
assessment. 
F promote the protection of the interface between water-bodies and land 
(for example, lake shores, river banks and wetlands). 
F involve water-resource users, particularly women and animal herders, 
in the local planning, designing, and follow up of water policies, 
programs and projects, in order to promote these activities without 
affecting the ecological balance. 
F recycle waste water when it is found to be safe for health and the 
environment. 
Grade 12 Geography 106
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
F promote, to the extent possible, viable measures to artificially recharge 
ground and surface-water resources. 
F promote effective water-management techniques at the farm level for 
improved performance of medium-to-large-scale irrigation schemes. 
F provide technical and credit support to the private sector in waterresource development activities. 
Note
The Hydro Politics of Ethiopia 
Ethiopia is the main source of the Nile waters. More than 86 
percent of the water of the Nile originates from Ethiopia. 
However, it is a country that has made the least use of it. 
During the past forty years Ethiopia was engaged in internal 
wars and did not have the time to harness the Nile waters for 
development.
However, Ethiopia’s interest in utilizing the Nile waters was 
clear. For example, in 1927, it sent Martin to the United States 
on a diplomatic mission to discuss the Lake Tana development 
project and recruit American engineers. However, the project 
failed to materialize due to opposition on the part of Britain 
and to the impending Italian invasion. 
In the 1950s, Ethiopia contracted a US engineering firm to 
conduct a comprehensive study of the Abbay river. Sadly, at 
that time Egypt and the Sudan were engaged in negotiations 
regarding the full utilization of the Nile waters. Ethiopia was 
not included in the negotiations. It was in this context that the 
Ethiopian government protested, asserting Ethiopia’s right to 
utilize the water resources within its borders. 
Despite these setbacks, Ethiopia’s rights to utilize its own water 
resources remain valid, reach on allocation has persisted the 
simple reasons that it is firmly committed to place and a winwin situation that can be derived from cooperation. 
 (Dr. Kinfe Abraham, 2000)
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 107
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
 Exercise 3.4 
I Are these statements True or False? 
1 In geography, drainage pattern and drainage system have the same 
meaning. 
2 Most Ethiopian drainage patterns are dendritic. 
3 One can confidently state that the plateau of Shoa serves as a watershed 
between the Abbay and Awash river basins. 
4 Altitudinal factors cause the energetic flow of Ethiopian rivers. 
5 The Abbay is the longest river in Ethiopia. 
6 Almost all rivers in Ethiopia are navigable. 
II Choose the best answer among the given alternatives 
7 All the rivers below drain the Southeastern Highlands except. 
A Wabeshebelle
B Ghenalle
C Omo-Ghibe
D Juba 
8 Ethiopia’s largest surface water is found in the 
A South and northwest
B Rift Valley System 
C Western Lowlands 
D A and B
9 The southeastern drainage system consists of 
A Genalle and Wabeshebelle rivers 
B Omo and Gibbe rivers 
C Baro and Akobo rivers
D Tekezze and Angereb rivers 
10 The Awash River rises from the plateau of 
A Hararge 
B Bale
C Shewa 
D South Wello
11 Which of the following rivers does not end in a lake? 
A Segen
B Awash 
C Omo-Ghibe
D Baro-Akobo 
Grade 12 Geography 108
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa
12 The Ethiopian lakes are said to be the results of structural activity. This is 
proved by their 
A location in wet areas 
B location in dry areas 
C location at high altitudes 
D having less volume of 
water
13 Which one of the following lakes is not a crater lake? 
A Lake Ashenge
B Lake Wonchi
C Hawassa
D Lake Arsedi 
14 What distinguishes the Rift Valley Lakes from the highland lakes? 
A the fluctuation of their volume of water 
B their significance for transportation 
C their richness in chemicals that produce soda ash 
D their location along transport lines 
15 The deepest and shallowest lakes of Ethiopia are, respectively: 
A Ziway and Shalla
B Shalla and Zeway
C Tana and Shalla
D Abbaya and Abyatta 
16 No Ethiopian river is navigable except
A Abbay
B Athbara 
C Baro–Akobo
D Omo 
17 The Awash River is the most utilized in Ethiopia for irrigation purposes. 
This is mainly due to its: 
A surrounding terrain, 
B flow to the Afar lowlands 
C unfluctuating volume of water 
D great number of tributaries 
18 One of the following is not a strategy adopted by the FDRE in conserving 
and managing water resources. 
A Rehabilitating wetlands and headstream areas 
B Providing technical support to the private sector in participating in 
the conservation strategy
C Recycling waste water when it is found to be safe
D Paying little concern to women’s role in the local involvement tasks.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 109
3.3 Geological Structure And Relief Of The Horn Of Africa 3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
19 Which of the following statements is not correct about Ethiopia’s current 
water-resource status? 
A Ethiopia is rich in rivers and lakes, but they are not utilized at all. 
B Available water resources in Ethiopia are being widely used. 
C Policy intervention is necessary to conserve Ethiopia’s water 
resources. 
D A number of development projects are underway regarding the major 
rivers of Ethiopia. 
3.4 CLIMATE OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ discuss the factors that influence the spatial distribution of the climatic 
elements of Ethiopia and the Horn;
Þ describe the spatial and temporal variation of temperature in Ethiopia and 
the Horn;
Þ explain the spatial and temporal variation of rainfall in Ethiopia and the 
Horn;
Þ compare the rainfall regions in Ethiopia.
Key Terms
³ Latitude 
³ Altitude 
³ Weather 
³ Climate 
³ Revolution of the earth 
³ Rotation 
³ Inter-Tropical Convergence zone 
³ Equatorial westeries
³ North easterlies 
³ South easterlies 
Are you aware of the weather information that is broadcast and televised by 
the Ethiopian Radio and Television Service Agency every morning and night? 
These reports inform the people of the projected daily maximum and minimum 
temperatures, cloud cover, humidity and other air conditions for the coming 
day. This information about air condition relates to weather. In contrast, climate 
information gives us long-term data about the average weather conditions of a 
place or a region over a long period of time; such a period is typically as long as 
30 years or more. 
Grade 12 Geography 110
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
3.4.1 Factors Influencing the Spatial and 
Temporal Distribution of Climatic 
Elements in Ethiopia and the Horn
What do you know about the concepts of weather and climate? Do you watch 
weather broadcast every day? What is the significance of knowing the weather 
condition of a place? 
Both weather and climate are composed of the following elements.
F precipitation
F temperature
F humidity
F air pressure
F wind 
F sunshine, etc.
The distribution of these elements over the surface of the earth is uneven in 
terms of magnitude and time. For example, Ethiopia and the Horn as a whole 
experience different temperatures on the same day or within a month. This spatial 
and temporal distribution of climatic elements is governed by the climate control 
factors described in the sections below.
The following factors influence the control of the spatial and temporal distribution 
of the climatic elements in Ethiopia and the Horn:
Â latitude
Â altitude
Â revolution of the earth and the inclination of the earth’s axis
Â distance from the sea
Â mountain barriers
Â weather systems
Â cloud cover 
Latitude
Are latitudes and parallels the same? 
Latitude, as a climate control, is the angular location of a place or point with 
reference to the direct rays of the sun. When we speak of the latitudinal impact 
on the climates of Ethiopia and the Horn, we are considering the intensity of 
temperature in the region. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 111
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn 3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
Ethiopia’s and the Horn’s location within the tropical zone results in
F high temperatures during most of the year
F high daily (diurnal) ranges of temperature
F relatively small annual ranges of temperature
F little difference between summer and winter in the ratios of daylight to 
night. 
Altitude
Do you have information about the altitude of the place where you are living? 
Is it a highland or lowland? Is the temperature mild or hot or cold? 
Altitude is height above mean sea level. Ethiopia’s altitudinal variation ranges 
from 116 meters below sea level up to 4620 meters above sea level. This 
altitudinal variation plays a significant role in temperature variation from place
to place. If you travel from Addis Ababa to Awash Arba through Bishoftu, Adama 
and Metahara, you can recognize a variation in temperature due to altitudinal 
changes. You may also like to note similar variation in your area. 
Altitude is the main factor that determines the spatial distribution of temperature 
in Ethiopia. Different places that exist on the same plane or angle of the rays of 
the sun might be expected to experience equal temperatures. However, due to the 
impact of altitude, they do not.
For example, three Ethiopian cities, Bako, Addis Ababa, and Awash all lie on the 
9o
N latitude, and therefore they might be expected to receive equal magnitudes 
of direct rays from the sun and therefore equal temperatures. However, their 
altitudes vary, and therefore their temperatures vary, as shown in Figure 3.11.
Note
Under normal conditions, there is a general decrease in 
temperature for increases in elevation. The average rate at 
which temperature changes per unit of altitudinal difference 
is known as lapse rate. This decrease in temperature upward 
from the earth’s lowest surface is noticeable at every other 8 to 
16 kms rise in the atmosphere. The rate of change is 6o
C per 
1000 meters. This change is called environmental lapse rate or 
atmospheric lapse rate.
Grade 12 Geography 112
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
Example:
The diagram illustrates the effect of altitude on temperature, confirming the fact 
that temperature decreases as altitude ascends from the lowlands towards the 
interior highlands. 
Revolution of the Earth and Inclination of the Earth’s Axis
The axis of the earth inclines 23½o to the normal of the elliptic. As the earth 
revolves around the sun, this inclination produces a change in the direction of the 
sun’s rays, thereby affecting the length of time that the sun shines on the earth 
every other day. 
Changes in the length of the day and in the directness of the sun’s rays cause 
seasons. These different seasons result in the temporal variation of temperature 
in a year in Ethiopia and in the Horn as a whole.
Distance from water bodies
Don’t you expect that water bodies or lakes (at local levels) have a moderating 
effect on the vicinal or adjacent land areas? 
Water bodies and landmasses have different levels of heat absorption. Land masses 
absorb and release heat energy more quickly than water bodies do. Distance from 
the sea affects the Horn’s climate only in coastal areas that are adjacent to the Red 
Sea and the northwestern Indian Ocean. In all other areas, the role of distance 
from the sea in climate control is insignificant.
9o 9 N lat. o
N lat.
BAKO (W.Shoa)
1800 masl
Average annual temperature 
17o
C
ADDIS ABEBA
2200 masl
Average annual temperature 
16o
C
Awash
900 masl
Average annual temperature 
>25o
C
West East
Figure 3.11: The role of altitude in modifying temperatures
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 113
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn 3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
Mountain Barriers 
Mountain barriers can affect climate in that they exert influence on the spatial
distribution of rainfall. Places located on the leeward side of mountains (also 
called rain shadow) receive little rain. This effect occurs in the northwestern and 
northeastern lowlands of Ethiopia and the Horn.
Weather Systems
Weather systems are actually the effects of spatial variation of the overhead sun, 
which in turn results in the variation of temperature, pressure and rainfall.
In the Horn of Africa, the apparent shift of the overhead sun between the Tropic 
of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn contributes to the prevalence of different 
wind systems in different seasons. The major weather systems that impact over 
Ethiopia and the Horn are: 
F The Northeast Tradewinds (prevalent in December, January and 
February) 
F The Equatorial Westerlies (prevalent in June, July and August) 
F The Equatorial easterlies (prevalent in September and October, March 
and April). 
It is because of these weather systems that the rainfall period varies in Ethiopia 
and the Horn. 
3.4.2 Spatial and Temporal Variation of 
Temperature in Ethiopia 
What do we mean by spatial and temporal in the context of Geography? 
A Spatial Variation of Temperature in Ethiopia
The two factors that most affect the spatial variation of temperature in Ethiopia 
are: 
Â cloud cover and 
Â altitude
Grade 12 Geography 114
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
Cloud Cover
Cloud cover, or cloud protection, as these names imply, is the covering of parts 
of the earth by clouds. The cover acts as temperature insulation for the earth, for 
both day and night hours. By day, it can prevent the full force of sun’s rays from 
heating the earth. By night, it can prevent the heat absorbed by the earth from 
escaping into the atmosphere. Therefore, the presence or absence of cloud cover 
produces spatial temperature variations in Ethiopia and elsewhere in the Horn.
Altitude
Do you know what agro-climatic zone mean? 
Is it different from the Greeks’ classification of temperature zones? 
Because altitude has such a large effect on temperature, it is a major determining 
factor of Ethiopia’s agro-climatic zones. These zones have traditionally been 
defined in terms of temperature.
Table 3.6 presents Ethiopia’s agro-climatic zone types, giving the altitude and 
mean annual temperature for each one. 
Table 3.6: Ethiopia’s Agro-Climatic Zones 
Altitude in meters Mean annual 
temperature in oC
Traditional agroecological name Global equivalence
3,300 and above <10 Wurch/Kur Alpine or Afro-Alpine
2,300 – 3,300 10 – 15 Dega Temperate
1,500 – 2,300 15 – 20 Woina Dega Subtropical
500 – 1500 20 – 30 Qolla Tropical
below 500 > 30 Bereha Desert
Wurch-Zone Areas 
Do you know that the term wurch has resemblance to temperature severity? 
The Wurch-zone areas have the highest altitudes and lowest temperatures. 
Frequently they have temperatures of less than 10o
C. These areas exist only in 
the very high mountains of South Gondar, Wollo, Shoa, Arsi and Bale.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 115
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn 3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
Example: 
Mt. Ras Dashen in Semine Gondar 
Mt. Guna in South Gondar
Mt. Megezez in North Shoa
Mt. Batu in Bale, etc.
Dega-Zone Areas 
What crops are grown in Dega areas? 
The Dega-zone areas are highland areas with lower altitudes and higher 
temperatures than Wurch-zone areas. Historically, Dega-zone areas were the 
home of concentrated human settlement. They were chosen because of the 
features below:
i secure location (from which people could defend themselves from 
threats)
ii reliable rainfall
iii absence of diseases such as malaria, etc.
Due to this high concentration of human population, the Dega zone has been 
intensively cultivated and has a high rate of soil erosion, overgrazing and 
deforestation. 
Some of the humid areas of this zone support two growing periods per year under 
rain-fed agriculture.
Example: 
F Dinsho in Bale
F Chillallo in Arsi
F Hulla in Sidama 
F Debresina in North Shewa
Note
Most of Ethiopia’s medieval and later settlements are 
concentrated in Dega-zone agro-climatic areas.
Grade 12 Geography 116
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
Woina-Dega-Zone Areas 
What is your understanding why the term Woina Dega comes after Dega? Does 
the term mean milder Dega? 
The Woina-Dega-zone areas contain most of Ethiopia’s agricultural land. They 
are the country’s main areas producing:
F Surplus grain F Inset and its derivatives
In the Woina-Dega zone, as in the Dega zone, there can be two growing seasons 
when rainfall reliability is high.
Qolla Zone and Bereha-Zone Areas 
What are the dominant crops grown in Qolla areas? Can we grow crops in 
Bereha zone areas? 
The Qolla and Bereha agro - climatic zones are largely confined to lowland areas
with altitudes of 1500 meters and below. They are sparsely populated and their 
populations are primarily engaged in pastoralist activities. They occupy 
F The peripheral areas of Ethiopia and Eritrea 
F Most of Somalia 
F Djibouti 
B Temporal variation of temperature in Ethiopia 
Can you identify the temperature differences in Ethiopia between the months of 
April/May and those of October/November? How do these differences occur? 
In Ethiopia and elsewhere in the Horn, temperatures vary from season to season. 
For example, in most of Ethiopia, high temperatures are recorded from March 
to June. Conversely, low temperatures are recorded from November to February 
These variations are primarily due to. 
F the tilting of the earth at 23½º to the normal elliptic
F the distance of the overhead sun and its apparent north-south movement 
across the equator as the earth revolves around the sun 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 117
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn 3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
 
Activity 3.9
1 Identify your own agro-climatic zone by referring to your area’s altitude. You 
might be able to obtain the masl (Meters Above Sea Level) value of your 
altitude from your area’s kebele offices or from those of other agencies in your 
area. Your teacher may help you as you try to get that information so that you 
can use it to identify your agro-climatic zone. 
2 Identify all the characteristics of your agro-climatic zone. 
3 Write a report on your agro-climatic zone.
The position of the overhead sun 
January
The position of the overhead sun 
July 
Figure 3.12: The position of the overhead sun
Grade 12 Geography 118
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
3.4.3 Spatial and Temporal Variation of 
Rainfall in Ethiopia and the Horn
Do you distinguish the two concepts spatial and temporal? Which of the two 
terms is very much explanatory in the distribution of rainfall in time series? 
Rainfall is one of the main climatic elements, as we indicated in the preceding 
discussion on the effects of weather systems and the distribution of climatic 
elements in Ethiopia and the Horn. Let us now consider the variation in detail. 
A Spatial Variation of Rainfall in Ethiopia and the Horn
Ethiopia and the Horn experience marked spatial and temporal variations of 
rainfall. The spatial variation is the result of the strength and nature of prevailing 
weather systems. 
As described earlier, Ethiopia’s and the Horn’s weather systems result from
F the apparent movement of the overhead sun
F prevailing winds 
F the associated Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone 
The first two factors were described in detail earlier. Now let’s focus on the 
effects of the associated Inter-Tropical Convergence zone.
Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) 
It is a low pressure zone formed by the convergence of Northeast Tradewinds and 
the Equatorial Westerlies. It shifts north and south of the equator following the 
position of the overhead sun. 
In July, its position is at the Tropic of Cancer. During this time, Ethiopia and the 
Horn come under the influence of the Equatorial Westerlies and Easterlies. These 
winds bring moisture to the highlands but decrease their magnitude and length of 
rainy periods northwards. 
In January, its position shifts to the Tropic of Capricorn leaving the region for the 
prevalence of the Northeast Tradewinds that are non-moistrue-laden. During this 
time only the Eritirean coastal lands and the Afar region receive rain. In most of 
Ethiopia, western Eriteria and Somalia, it becomes dry season. 
In March and September, the position of the ITCZ is around the equator. Hence, 
the Equatorial Easterlies provide rain to the highlands of Somalia, and to the 
Central and Southeastern lowlands and highlands of Ethiopia. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 119
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn 3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
 
 
B Temporal Variation of Rainfall in Ethiopia
Ethiopia’s rainfall is characterized by seasonal variation. There are two main 
rainy seasons: “Kiremt (summer) and Belg (spring)”. These two rainy seasons 
contribute more than 90% of the country’s rain supply. There are two other rainy 
seasons – the autumn rains, called the Metsew, and the winter rains. Compared to 
the two main seasons, the duration, volume, and aerial coverage of Metsew rains 
are less. The winter rainy season is insignificant for the highlands. It supplies rain 
only to the Afar lowlands, the Red Sea coastal areas and the eastern escarpment 
of the Eritrean highlands. 
Activity 3.10
1 Identify your locality, based on its rainfall seasons. In which seasons do you 
experience rain?
2 What moisture-bearing winds prevail over your area?
3 What is the attractive factor for the moisture coming as rain to your locality?
4 Identify the hottest and coldest months in your area.
Red Sea
Gulf of Aden
Equator 0o
International boundary
Boundary of rainfall region
Summer and Spring
Winter rainfall
Spring and Autumn rainfall
Summer rainfall
All year round rainfall
RAINFALL REGIONS OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN
Source: Adjusted and 
modified from the Atlas 
for secondary schools 
in Ethiopia
Figure 3.13: Rainfall regions of Ethiopia and the Horn
Grade 12 Geography 120
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
3.4.4 Rainfall Regions in Ethiopia and the 
Horn
Does rainfall regions indicate variation in rainfall magnitude and duration 
within Ethiopia and the Horn? 
Based on rainfall distribution, both in space and time, five types of rainfall regions 
can be identified in Ethiopia and the Horn. These are: 
F year-round rainfall region (wet in most months)
F summer rainfall region 
F autumn-and-spring rainfall region 
F winter rainfall region 
F merged spring, summer, and autumn rainfall region
Let us consider each region in turn. 
Year-Round Rainfall Region
In Ethiopia, the area of year-round rainfall:
F includes the southwestern plateau comprising the highlands of Wellega, 
Keffa, Illubabor and Gamo Goffa. 
This region can be represented by the following stations: 
Gore, Mizan, Metu, Bonga, Gambella, etc. 
The region has more rainy days than any other part of the country. The average 
rainfall varies from 1400 mm to 2200 mm.
The year-round rainfall region is represented by the letter B on Figure 3.14.
Summer Rainfall Region
The summer rainfall region is the largest in the country. This region consists of 
the Northwest Highlands and Western Lowlands, and can be represented by the 
following stations. 
Debremarkos, Fitche, Gondar, Bahrdar, etc. 
Its moisture-bearing winds are the Equatorial Westerlies and Easterlies. The 
summer rainfall region is represented by the letter A in Figure 3.14.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 121
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn 3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
Autumn-and-Spring Rainfall Region
The autumn-and-spring rainfall region covers the southeastern highlands and 
associated lowlands up to the Somalia coasts. They can be represented by the 
following stations: 
Gode, Moyalle, Jijiga, Yabello, Baydhabo.
The region’s moisture-bearing winds are the Equatorial Easterlies. They pick 
up moisture from the Indian Ocean, and they blow over the autumn and spring 
rainfall region when the Northeasterlies and Equatorial Westerlies are weak. The 
region’s average rainfall varies from less than 500 to 1000 mm. 
The autumn-and-spring rainfall region is represented by E in Figure 3.14.
Winter Rainfall Region
The winter rainfall region consists of the eastern escarpment of the western 
highlands, the middle Rift Valley section, the Afar subdivision and Eritrea. The 
winter rainfall region can be represented by the following stations. 
Mitswa, Assaita and Djibouti. 
The region’s moisture-bearing winds are, for the most part, the North Easterlies. 
The air mass is continental (dry) and has only a short sea trajectory (that is the 
Red Sea). 
It is represented by letter D in Figure 3.14. The region’s total annual moisture is 
very low and of short duration. 
Merged Spring, Summer and Autumn Rainfall Region 
The merged spring, summer and autumn rainfall region is the smallest in the 
country. It consists mainly of the western foothills of the Southeastern Highlands. 
Note
In Ethiopia, highland rainfall is more dependable than lowland 
rainfall. However, highland dependability decreases from 
the southwestern highlands in all directions. In short, rainfall 
variability (deviation from the expected amount and time) 
decreases from areas of heavy rains to areas of low rainfall. 
Grade 12 Geography 122
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn
The region’s total annual rainfall varies from 1500 mm to 1000 mm. It covers a 
corridor that stretches from the Sidama Highlands to the Hararge Plateau. 
The merged spring, summer, and autumn rainfall region is represented by the 
letter C in Figure 3.14: stations-Assaita, Awash, etc. 
 Exercise 3.5 
I Match the items of Column A with the items of Column B.
A B
1 Experiences rain almost all year round.
2 Experiences mostly summer rains.
3 Temperature zones that are largely 
confined to places over 3,300 masl.
4 Temperature zones that are largely 
confined to the southeastern lowlands.
5 Moisture-bearing winds to the central 
and northern parts of Ethiopia.
6 Pools for the autumn and spring rains 
of Ethiopia.
7 Pools for the summer rains of Ethiopia.
8 The continental winds that prevail in 
winter over the greater part of the Red 
Sea and central Ethiopia.
A Northeasterlies
B The highlands of South 
Gondar 
C Bereha
D Alpine or Afro-Alpine
E The Equatorial Westerlies
F The Indian Ocean
G The Atlantic Ocean
H The plateaus of Illubabor 
and Western Wellega
34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
0 50 100 200 300 400
Kilometers
Scale
A
B
E
C
D
Figure 3.14: Rainfall Regions of Ethiopia
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 123
3.4 Climate Of Ethiopia And The Horn 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
II Questions to Think Over.
9 What natural factors are responsible for the all year round wet conditions 
of the southwestern part of Ethiopia?
10 What do we mean by the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone? Why does it 
apparently shift north and south of the equator?
11 If the axis of the earth were perpendicular, what effect would it have on 
temporal variation of temperature?
12 By referring to the rainfall regions of Ethiopia and the Horn,
a Identify the rainfall region in which you live.
b Suggest the total annual rainfall that your area experiences referring 
to the theoretically proposed amount in the text.
c For each rainfall region, select a representative town. Then draw 
a bar graph that shows the rainfall of each of the towns you have 
chosen. For source materials, use references such as your school 
atlas, the National Atlas of Ethiopia, textbooks, and other sources of 
information.
d Which region has the least rainfall variability?
3.5 NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILD 
ANIMALS OF ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Þ relate types of natural vegetation to climatic regions;
Þ identify the wild animals of Ethiopia;
Þ discuss the effects of human intervention on forest lands;
Þ show interest to participate in the conservation of natural vegetation and 
wild animals. 
Key Terms
³ Afro alpine 
³ Forest 
³ Desert 
³ Gallery forest 
³ Coniferous trees 
³ Deforestation 
³ Overgrazing 
³ Endemic 
³ National park 
³ Game reserve 
³ Overcultivation 
³ Soil conservation 
Grade 12 Geography 124
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
3.5.1 Types of Natural Vegetation of Ethiopia
What are the major types of natural vegetation in Africa? Which type of 
vegetation is dominant in Ethiopia? 
Please go to a nearby church, mosque, or other sacred place. Observe the 
predominant trees among the natural vegetation. If there is a forest nearby, visit 
that too, and identify the predominant trees. They indicate the natural vegetation 
of the area.
Natural vegetation refers to any original plant grown in and covering an area. 
The distribution of natural vegetation is influenced by many factors. The most 
important ones are: 
F altitude
F climate
F soil type, and
F drainage 
The types of natural vegetation in an area are strongly determined by temperature 
and rainfall. That is why the natural vegetation of an area is a good indicator of 
the area’s climatic conditions.
Natural Vegetation’s Relationship to Altitude and Rainfall
In Ethiopia, the types of the natural vegetation of an area are highly correlated 
with altitude and rainfall, as they are with temperature. The lowlands have harsh 
environments due to low rainfall and are characterized by xerophytic plants, 
while the highlands are chracterised by different types of tree stands and forests.
Figure 3.15: Natural vegetation 
map of Ethiopia
Wabi Shebele
Genale
Lake Abaya
Awash
Omo
Abay
Lake Tana
Tekeze
34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
0 50 100 200 300 400
Kilometers
Scale
ETHIOPIA-NATURAL VEGETATION
High altitude vegetation zone 
Wet evergreen mountain forest
Dry mountain forest
Mountain savanna
Bush and low woods 
Dry savanna
Desert
Marsh
Open deciduous forest
Bamboo forest
Thorn savanna
Semi-desert
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 125
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
Based on altitude, we can classify the natural vegetation of Ethiopia into the 
following five types:
Â Afro-alpine and sub-Afro alpine
Â Forests
Â Woodland savanna
Â Steppe vegetation
Â Desert and semidesert vegetation 
Afro-Alpine and Sub Afro-Alpine Vegetation 
What do you know about the difference between Afro - Alpine and Sub Afro 
Alpine? 
This type of vegetation is found at very high altitudes (above 3300 meters). 
Afro-alpine and sub-afro-alpine vegetation is very similar to European alpine 
vegetation. Sub-afro-alpine vegetation is found between 3000 – 3300 m, while Afroalpine vegetation is found at higher altitudes than these. In Ethiopia, Afro-alpine 
and sub-Afro-alpine vegetations are found in the:
F Highlands of Semein and 
F Highlands of Bale
Afro-Alpine vegetation consists of tussock grasslands, serules, scattered mosses 
and lichens. SubAfro Alpines are predominantly woodland scrubs. Gibra 
(Lobelia rhynchopetalum) and Asta (Erica arborea) are dominant plant species in 
this region of natural vegetation. 
Forests
What is the present status of Ethiopia’s forest resources when compared to the 
other countries of the Horn? 
In Ethiopia, forests are characterized by broad altitudinal ranges (450 – 3300 m) and 
large variations in mean annual rainfall (200 – 2200 mm). This wide variation 
in altitude and rainfall results in the formation of highland and lowland forests. 
These two types of forests have very different characteristics since they are the 
results of altitudinal zonation.
Grade 12 Geography 126
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
A Highland Forests (forests that grow between 1500 - 3300 masl 
altitude)
Ethiopia’s highland forests consist of
F Kerkha (Arundinarial) 2800 – 3000 masl 
F Tid (Juniperous Procera) or Coniferous trees 2200 – 2800 masl
F Zigba (Podocarpus) 1800 – 2200 masl 
F Woira (Oliia Africana) and Kosso (Hagenia Abbyssinia (1500 – 1800)
B Lowland Forests (forests that grow below 1500 m altitude)
What are the temperature and rainfall limits for the formation of forests? 
Is there a strong relationship between altitudinal variation and types of forests? 
Which part of Ethiopia is currently under dense forest cover? 
These forests are known as gallery/riverine forests. In Ethiopia, they grow along 
the banks of the Awash, Wabishabelle, and Ghanalle Rivers where moisture is 
available in the soil. The predominant trees are Sholla and Warka. In areas where 
mean annual rainfall exceeds 500 mm, Baphia forest predominates.
Woodland Savanna 
Can you remember the sub-divisions of the African Savana? Do you expect 
certain similarities between woodland Savana and proper Savana? 
Like forests, Savanna woodlands are found in both highland and lowland areas. 
Their altitudinal range is 250 – 2300 m, and their mean annual rainfall range is 
between 200 – 1400 mm. (Example: acacia, grass etc.)
However, such vegetation is dominant at lower elevations and drier climates than 
the forests.
Savanna grasslands experience marked seasons and are characterized by scattered 
acacia trees. 
In areas where mean annual rainfall is more than 1000 mm, these grasslands can 
form attractive park-like areas with acacia, wild fig, sycamore and kosso trees.
Ethiopia’s savanna grasslands are found in the southern half of Ziway, Langano, 
Abiyatta and Hawassa.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 127
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
AFROALPINE REGION 
SUBAROALPINE REGION 
Precipitation 
(mm)
Altitude 
(m)
FOREST REGION 
WOODLAND SAVANNAH REGION 
JUNIPERUS FOREST 
500 1000
1000
2000
3000
4000
1500 2000
PODOCARPUS 
FOREST 
BAPHIA FOREST 
OLEA FOREST 
ANINGERIA FOREST 
ARUNDINARIA 
FOREST 
JUNIPERUS 
WOODLAND 
STEPPE REGION SEMI DESERT REGION 
ACACIA 
WOODLAND
MIXED 
DECIDUOUS 
WOODLAND 
Acacia 
mellifera 
w. Acacia 
seyal w. 
Acacia 
etbaica w. 
Acacia 
xiphocorpa w. 
Figure 3.16: Vegetation regions correlated to altitude and mean annual rainfall
Grade 12 Geography 128
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
Semi-desert and Desert Vegetation
Is there a remarkable difference between semi desert and desert vegetation? 
How can you differentiate the two? 
Sem-idesert and desert vegetation consists of short acacia, thorn bushes, succulent 
plants and a few rough grasses. In Ethiopia, vegetation of this kind is found in the 
Eastern, Northwestern and Southeastern Lowlands, i.e., in areas where annual 
rainfall is below 500 mm and drought persists for a long period of time. 
Activity 3.11
1 With your teacher, schedule an educational trip to nearby natural areas. If possible, 
the teacher will have a camera or video camera to use during the trip.
2 Draw a sketch map of the target area.
3 Write a short report describing the area’s
F predominant trees
F temperature
F rainfall seasons
4 With your classmates, discuss and then list the area’s natural vegetation.
Note
Concern for the preservation of Ethiopia’s forests must be a 
major issue on the public agenda. Communities and individuals 
must participate in the conservation and management of the 
country’s forest resources. Our pressing needs to perform 
these tasks is a call to every citizen.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 129
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
 Exercise 3.6
Match the items in Box A with those in Box B
Box A
1 Natural vegetation 
2 Baphia forest 
3 Juniperous procera 
4 Arundinaria forests
5 Riverine forests
6 Afro-alpine forests
7 Practicing agro-forestry 
8 Developing school curricula in forestry management
9 Promoting the role of youth in conserving local forest 
resources 
Box B
A Forests found in humid areas of about 1000 masl or below
B An indicator of an area’s climate
C A highland forest similar to forests of coniferous trees
D Institutional development to conserve forest resources 
E Community capacity building to conserve forest resources
F A highland forest that grows between 2500 – 3000 meters 
G Gallery forests
H Type of forest that grows above 3000 meters
I Community practices to conserve or reduce the destruction 
of forests
3.5.2 Wild Animals of Ethiopia
Do you think that wild animals have significance to the national economy? If 
so, can you mention some? 
The diversity in Ethiopia’s topography, climate, and vegetation has given the 
country a wide variety of wild animals. Ethiopia’s wild-animal stock is generally 
similar to that of East Africa as a whole, due to topographic similarity and other 
aspects. 
Grade 12 Geography 130
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
Ethiopia has about 277 species of mammals and 862 species of birds. Of these, 
seven species of mammals and twenty five species of birds are endemic to 
Ethiopia. 
Types of Wild Animals in Ethiopia
Can you identify or state some of the common and endemic wild animals of 
Ethiopia? Which type is prevalent in your wereda or zone? 
The many types of wild animals found in Ethiopia can be grouped into the 
following broad categories. 
F Common wild animals: These ones are animals commonly found in 
many places of the world. Many areas of Ethiopia have many common 
wild animals, including the hyena and the jackal. 
F Game animals: These are animals that are killed for sport. Ethiopia’s 
game animals include herbivores and carnivores. They are found in the 
lowlands. 
Here are some examples of Ethiopia’s game animals:
F Arboreals: These animals are animals that climb up trees. Ethiopia’s 
arboreal animals, such as the Colobus monkey and baboons, are mostly 
found in the rainforest regions of Ethiopia. 
F Aquatic animals: These creatures are animals that live in lakes and rivers. 
Example: Fish, crocodiles and hippopotamus.
F Birds: Ethiopia has different kinds of both endemic and migratory 
birds; for example, Pelicans and flamingoes.
F Rare/Endemic animals: These are wild animals found only in 
Ethiopia. These days Ethiopia’s endemic animals exist in only very 
small numbers. They inhabit highland and other areas. They are at 
great risk of extinction. The following are some of them. 
K Walia Ibex (wild goat), found in the Semein highlands. 
K Mountain Nyala (Dega Agazon), found in the Bale mountains. 
K Carnivores lions, leopards, cheetahs etc. 
K Herbivores 
browsers – giraffes 
grazers – wild asses, zebras, etc.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 131
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
K ‘Gelada’ or ‘Chelad’ baboon, found in the Semein highlands. 
K Menilik’s Bushbuk (‘Dikula’) in the Shoan and Bale highlands. 
K Swayne’s Hartebeest (‘Korkay’), found in the Nechsar park and 
the Sankalle sanctuary. 
K Semein Fox (‘Key Kebero’), found in the Bale and Semein 
Highlands.
K Wild Ass (Yedur Ahiya), found in the Afar and Southeast Lowlands. 
 
These rare animals, especially the Walia Ibex and Semien Fox, are approaching 
extinction.
Causes of the Extinction of Wild-Animals
What does the concept or term extinction mean? Have you ever thought of the 
situation? 
Photograph 3.8 Wildlife of Ethiopia
Grade 12 Geography 132
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
The main reasons for such conditions are the shrinking and destruction of habitats, 
which are mainly forest land by way of:
F rapid expansion of farmland, settlements, and industrialization
F expansion of grazing land
F wide spread practices of illegal hunting by the local people in search of 
meat, skin, fur, horn and ivory. 
F frequent wild fires 
What is more, 
F migration of the wild animals to neighboring countries, due to shortages 
of food and water in Ethiopia adds to their perpetual disappearance. 
Conservation Measures
What can we do to save, sustain and protect wildlife resources?
Here are some conservation measures that have been recommended:
F establish national parks, game reserves and sanctuaries.
F Monitor and administer existing conservation areas properly. 
F establish and implement strong laws that effectively prohibit illegal 
hunting.
F educate the public about environment protection. 
F protect habitats. 
F educate and encourage local communities to protect their animals’ 
habitats and resources.
As you can see, some of these mitigation measures involve direct protection of 
the animals – for example by establishing and properly administering protected 
areas; and by training people in how to protect these areas.
Establishing Protected Parks, Reserves, and Sanctuaries.
National Parks 
Are there national parks in your region? Have you had an opportunity to 
participate in educating the community about the conservation of wild animals? 
National parks are conservation areas for wild animals in which legal hunting is 
allowed, with some restrictions. The Ethiopian National Parks are. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 133
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
Table 3.7: Ethiopian National Parks 
Name Area in km Location 
Gambella 5,061 Gambella 
Yongudirasa 4,731 Afar 
Omo 4,068 SNNPR
Gerallea 3,858 Somali 
Allattish 2,665 Amhara 
Bale Mountains 2,471 Oromiya 
Maggo 2,162 SNNPR
Cheberra churchura 1,215 SNNPR
Abiyatta – Shalla Lakes 887 Oromiya 
Awash 756 Oromiya-Afar
Nech Sar 514 SNNPR
Semein Mountains 225 Amhara 
 
 
Photograph 3.9 Awash National park
Grade 12 Geography 134
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
Game Reserves
Game reserves are wild-animal conservation areas where tourists are allowed 
to practice licensed hunting. The game reserves of Ethiopia are listed in 
Table 3.8. 
Table 3.8: Ethiopian game Reserves
Name Area in km Location
Borena 45,366 Oromiya 
Lower Wabishebelle 23,788 Somali 
Arsi 10,876 Oromiya 
Bale 9,663 Oromiya 
Western Shoa 9,136 Oromiya 
Afdim Gewane 5,932 Afar-Somali
Akobo 5,049 Gambella 
Mursi 4,561 SNNPR
Mizan Teferri 4,172 SNNPR
Jikawo 3,375 Gambella 
Western Omo 3,200 SNNPR
Chercher-Arbagugu 3,045 Oromiya 
Erer – Gotta 2,386 Somali 
Geddeo 2,347 SNNPR
Dabus Valley 2,127 Benshangul-Gumuz 
Boyyo 58 SNNPR
Segan Valley N:A SNNPR
Sanctuaries
Sanctuaries are wild-animal conservation areas where hunting is strictly 
prohibited. Example: Afar Gewane.
Table 3.9: Sanctuaries of Ethiopia 
Name Area in km2 Location 
Babille 6982 Oromiya
Sankele 54 SNNP
Yabello (yavello) 2500 Oromiya
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 135
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
3.5.3 Human Intervention in Forest Lands 
How do human beings interfere with forest lands? 
One intervention is in deforestation. At the beginning of the 20th C, the forest 
cover of Ethiopia was estimated at 40 percent of the entire country. Now it is 
less than 3 percent. This deforestation rate is alarming. We estimate that Ethiopia 
loses 100,000 – 200,000 hectares of forestland every year.
Causes of Deforestation
What are the major causes for this drastic rate of destruction? 
The main causes are:
F unwise tree cutting for supplies and materials
F overgrazing
F slash-and-burn practices
F fuel wood
F furniture
F construction etc.
Overgrazing: This is the practice of placing too MANY livestock on a given 
piece of land. The activities of these animals strips the land bare. 
In addition to overgrazing pasture areas, people are increasingly converting forest 
land to pasture land. This practice has expanded grazing land at the expense of 
forest land – in other words, through deforestation.
Slash and burn practices: People are involved in slash-and-burn practices to 
clear forestland in order to prepare it for farming. This practice essentially strips 
the forest bare by slashing (cutting down and digging up) all or most of the trees 
and other vegetation and then burning the piles away. 
Slash-and-burn is also used to periodically strip an area of farmland in order to 
leave it lying fallow to regain its nutrients. 
In Ethiopia, slashing and burning forests destroys a large area of forest annually. 
This approach to gaining farmland is commonly practiced in southwestern 
Ethiopia.
Grade 12 Geography 136
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
Expansion of built up areas: Built-up areas are areas occupied by factories, 
residence, recreational sites etc. Ethiopia’s expanding human population 
increasingly requires more area for housing and other services. Some of the land 
that is converted to built-up areas is forestland.
Mitigation Measures
What should be done to protect, rehabilitate and achieve sustainable use of 
forests in Ethiopia?
The following approaches have been suggested for slowing down and/or 
mitigating Ethiopia’s rapid deforestation rate:
Â conservation
Â capacity building
Â institutional development
These approaches are described below. However, despite their having great 
potential, these approaches alone are not enough. More ideas are needed, and 
sustained effort must be applied to enhance the mitigation effort.
Conservation of Natural Vegetation 
Have you developed attitude of conserving resources? 
What measures do you often take to conserve resources at household level? 
These conservation measures have been suggested for preserving Ethiopia’s 
forests:
F Reforestation – planting trees after every tree harvest.
F Afforestation – planting trees on bare and unproductive lands.
F Controlling burning practices (i.e., the slash-and-burn activities).
F Practicing agro-forestry.
F Reducing the use of fuel wood by adopting alternative sources of energy 
for household consumption.
F Controlling overgrazing.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 137
3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia 3.5 Natural Vegetation And Wild Animals Of Ethiopia
Capacity Building and Institutional Development 
Here are some approaches to preserve Ethiopia’s forests through capacity building 
and institutional development:
F Providing environmental education to enhance public awareness about 
the use and management of natural vegetation. 
F Developing forest-related curricula for schools, colleges, universities, 
forestry institutions, and forestry-management institutions. Then 
implement those curricula.
F Supporting and protecting community forests by applying strict legal 
measures.
F Moderating the existing rapid rate of population growth
F Facilitate community participation in combatting deforestation.
F Changing the life style of the people in terms of ongoing deforestation 
activities.
These goals must be vigorously implemented if we are to attain the country’s 
ongoing goal of defeating deforestation. For example, the anti-deforestation rules 
and laws must be vigorously executed by relevant agencies.
Photograph 3.10 Reforestation
Grade 12 Geography 138
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 
3.6 SOILS OF ETHIOPIA 
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ relate formation of soils of Ethiopia with geological events of the past;
Þ distinguish major soil types in Ethiopia; and
Þ realize soils problems and its conservation in Ethiopia.
Key Terms
³ Parent material
³ Humus
³ Conservation
³ Leaching
³ Soil
3.6.1 Formation of Soils in Ethiopia 
Why is soil erosion a serious issue in Ethiopia? 
Soils are the uppermost loose or unconsolidated material overlying the earth’s 
crustal rocks. Its major components are water, air, organic and inorganic minerals. 
It is a dynamic, natural and complex substance which can support animals and 
plants. 
Soils of Ethiopia owe their origin to:
F parent rock material, which has been broken into small particles by way 
of weathering and natural decomposition 
F climatic conditions, which largely determine the speed and nature of 
the processes that form the soil; for example, extreme heat, or cold, 
could stop the work of bacteria, and the amount of moisture influences 
on several aspects of soil formation. 
F vegetation cover, which adds humus to the soils and renders support to 
the soil making animals and bacteria 
On the plateaus that make up extensive areas in north, north western, south 
western, and central and south eastern Ethiopia the parent rocks are volcanic 
origin and experience sufficient rainfall. The soils formed in these areas are red 
basaltic and black basaltic soils. Unlike the red basaltic soils, the black soils have 
high clay content that makes the soil difficult for farming. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 139
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 
In areas where the hard crystalline rocks are the parent rock, the soils are poor 
and thin. They are also rocky and acidic. They range in colour from grey to 
brown. They are found in Hararghe plateaus and Borena lowlands. 
In the Afar region where recent volcanic deposits and dried-out lake deposits had 
occurred, very shallow and saline-dominated soils are formed. Due to time and 
climatic effects, these soils are not deep and fertile. 
In the southeastern lowlands where the parent rocks are sedimentary rocks, the 
soils lack humus but are rich in phospherous and potash. They are also low in 
nitrogen content. 
In the lower course of the major rivers, transported soils often known as alluvial 
soils are dominant. These soils because of their volcanic origin and continuous 
nourishment of water, are fertile. 
People depend on soils; conversely, the quality of the soils depends on how 
wisely people use the land. Not only in countries like Ethiopia, whose economy 
is largely agrarian, but also in highly industrialized countries like the USA, soil 
is one of the most important bases of life. 
3.6.2 Types of Soil in Ethiopia 
Can you describe what soil is and how it is formed? 
The soils of Ethiopia are basically derived from crystalline, volcanic and Mesozoic 
sedimentary rocks. According to the latest classification made by the FAO, there 
are eighteen classes of soil in Ethiopia. 
Here are the main soil types. They cover more than 85 percent of the country. 
Â Nithosols (red basaltic soils): These soil types: 
F cover about 12 percent of the country. 
F are basically associated with high rainfall and are found in areas that 
were previously covered with forest. 
F are predominant in the Western Highlands of Wellega, Keffa, Illubabor, 
the Southern Highlands of Sidama, the Central and Western Highlands 
of Shoa, the Highlands of Gojjam and the Eastern Highlands of 
Hararghe.
Grade 12 Geography 140
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 
F are matured soils with deep profiles. They are highly leached and lack 
soluble minerals like Sodium, Calcium, etc., but they are rich in iron 
and aluminum. 
F are potentially good for farming and other agricultural practices since 
they are friable, and have a stable structure; as a result, 
F are the most widely cultivated soil type. They are the best soils for 
coffee, inset and cereals. 
Â Vertisols (black Basaltic soils): soil types of these sort: 
F cover about 10 percent of the total land of Ethiopia.
F have high clay content; so, are sticky. For this reason and for poor 
drainage qualities, such soils are difficult to be used for farming 
purposes.
F have excellent nutrients that could provide support for agriculture, but 
their poor drainage qualities limit their use for grazing purposes. 
F are largely found in Arsi, Bale and central Hararghe, where there are 
pronounced wet and dry seasons. 
Â Acrisols: These soil types: 
F are found associated with Nithosols. 
F cover about 4.5 percent of the country. 
F are widely found in the Southwestern Highlands of Ethiopia,where 
there is high rainfall. 
F are extremely leached; and therefore, have low productivity capacity.
Â Cambisoils: Such soils: 
F are soils that developed from the recent lava deposits of the Quaternary 
Period.
F are young and shallow. 
F are found on the rugged and sloping terrain of the Plateau of Shoa 
(eastern escarpment) and Chercher Highlands.
Â Regosols: These types: 
F like the cambisols, are shallow and young; but they are coarse-textured.
F have low agricultural value. 
F are found in the Danakil and Ogaden plains. 
Â Xerosols: These soils: 
F These soils are generally young and shallow, and are found in arid and 
semi-arid regions. They have a weakly developed profile.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 141
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 
F are found extensively in the Northeastern escarpment, Northwestern 
and Southeastern Lowlands.
F are characterized by high salt content and humus deficiencies. 
F have little significance for agriculture except places where they could 
be irrigated. 
Â Yermosols: Soils of this sort:
F are found in desert and semi-desert areas, as are xerosols.
F are salty, acidic and have a weakly-developed profile. 
F are not suitable for cultivation, even when irrigated, due to their salty 
and acidic nature.
Â Luvisols: These soils: 
F are well-developed in areas where there are clearly marked wet and dry 
seasons and when leaching is not very high.
F are among the best soils, since they have good chemical nutrients.
F are intensively cultivated, except in areas that are steeply sloped or 
water-logged.
F are found around Lake Tana, and in the eastern part of the Northern 
Central Highlands and in the Southern Lowlands.
Â Lithosols: Such soils: 
F are similar to cambisols and regosols in their poor maturity and their 
location on steep slopes.
F are found in areas of low precipitation.
F cover the escarpments of the Northeastern and Chercher Highlands. 
Â Fluvisols: This type of soils: 
F are soils that rivers have transported from highlands to lowlands.
F cover about 10 percent of the country’s total area.
F are associated with river, sea and lake deposits.
F have very good agricultural potential. 
F are found extensively in the lower regions of the Omo, Awash, Abbay 
and Baro-Akobo Rivers.
Grade 12 Geography 142
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 
 Exercise 3.7
1 Compare and contrast 
a cambisols with regosols and xerosols
b nithosols with vertisols
c luvisols with fluvisols 
2 List the soils of Ethiopia in order of their suitability for agriculture from the 
best to the worst.
Match the items under Column A with those under Column B. 
A
3 Extremely leached soils 
4 Young and shallow soils found in 
arid and semi-arid areas 
5 Young and shallow soils covering 
the rugged slopes of the Shoa 
Plateau and the Chercher Highlands. 
6 Plentiful along the lower regions of 
the Omo, Awash, Rivers etc. 
7 Black soil that is hard to plough 
during the rainy season 
8 Red basaltic soil 
B
A Fluvisols 
B Vertisols 
C Nithosols 
D Xerosols 
E Cambisols 
F Acrisols 
3.6.3 Soil Problems and Conservation in 
Ethiopia 
Ethiopia’s Soil Problem – Erosion
What is the basic difference between soil erosion and leaching? 
For countries like Ethiopia, where the mainstay of the peoples’ livelihood is 
agriculture, issues related to soil are extremely important. Therefore, whatever 
setback happens must be carefully handled. One such setback is erosion. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 143
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 
Soil Erosion by Running Water 
Every year enormous quantities of soil are carried away by Ethiopia’s rivers to 
neighboring countries. As a matter of fact, the main problem related to soil in 
Ethiopia is erosion by running water. 
Examples: 
F River Abbay alone carries away 3000 – 4000 million cubic metric 
tons of soil annually. 
F The Ethiopian highlands experience a loss of about 2000 tons of soil 
per square kilometer per year. 
Factors that Accelerate Soil Erosion in Ethiopia 
It is known that natural and human-made factors accelerate soil erosion. 
Which of the two factors is prevalent in your locality? 
Both natural and human-made factors play a role in accelerating erosion.
Natural Factors
Two main natural factors contribute to soil erosion in Ethiopia.
F Topography: Many Ethiopian rivers set in motion from high places and 
have steep profiles as they progress to lower altitudes. These conditions 
are highly conducive for erosion to take place at ease.
F The heavy summer rains: Although most of Ethiopia’s rivers have very 
low flows during the dry season, the heavy summer rains turn them into 
rushing torrents. The cracks that have appeared during the dry seasons 
turn rapidly into deep gullies. These conditions greatly facilitate the 
mechanical action of raindrops to wear away the surface soil, eroding 
it deeply. 
Human-Made Factors
Human activities accelerate the soil erosion that is caused by the natural factors 
that we have just considered. Here are some of the many ways in which people 
have contributed to the erosion of the land that they depend on.
Grade 12 Geography 144
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 
F Deforestation: Most of the highlands of Ethiopia were once covered 
by forests. These forests provided cover for the land and protected the 
soil from the physical action of rainfall. Deforestation is progressing 
at a rapid rate and has become one of the main causes for Ethiopia’s 
hastened erosion rate.
F Bad cultivation practices: Bad cultivation practices also speed up 
erosion by making the soil vulnerable to the natural forces that we have 
just described a few lines above. For example,
K Overcropping – This is one bad cultivation practice. It is the act of 
planting an area too densely. This approach to farming uses up the 
soil’s nutrients faster than natural processes can replenish them 
and destroys the land’s fertility. 
K Overcultivation – This one entails tilling land every year. For 
example, in order to keep up with increasing food requirements, 
people overcultivate their lands. Too frequent tilling can remove 
nutrients from the soil faster than natural processes can replenish 
them. 
K Slash and burn – With such a practice, people slash (cut down and 
dig up) all or most of an area’s vegetation and then burn the results. 
In farming, this practice is sometimes used periodically to strip an 
area before leaving it to lie fallow to regain its nutrients. However, 
since the soil is now bare and therefore unprotected, the land is 
vulnerable to the forces of erosion. Slash-and-burn techniques are 
also used to clear forestland in order to prepare it for farming, but 
unwittingly exposing the soil for erosion. 
F Keeping too many livestock (overgrazing): Most areas used for 
pastoral activities are overgrazed because too many animals have been 
kept there relative to their grass. The livestock destroys the vegetation 
faster than it can replenish itself. When the vegetation is destroyed, 
the land is laid bare and is therefore vulnerable to erosion. Goats are 
particularly damaging. They destroy all kinds and parts of an area’s 
vegetation, including the roots. 
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 145
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 
F Unscientific tilling: Most peasants do not use (being unaware) scientific 
farming techniques, such as terracing and contour ploughing, which 
serve as checks against soil erosion. 
F Using inadequately maintained tracks and trails: Without adequate 
maintenance, frequently used routes across the countryside can 
gradually change into deeply eroded gullies and eventually make them 
impassable, for they are partly eroded. Most of this destruction is 
caused by the action of rain and other running water on the soil, which 
has been laid bare by continual foot and vehicle traffic. 
Conservation Measures to Combat Soil Erosion
What does conservation of resources mean? What are the problems encountered 
by soil erosion? 
Here are some conservation measures that have been recommended for minimizing 
soil loss by erosion in Ethiopia. 
F Reforestation – replanting trees immediately after tree harvesting; 
F Afforestation of areas that are not used for cultivation, are along steep 
slopes that are exposed to erosion. 
F Proper terracing of slopes and are set a side for cultivation. 
F Intercropping – this is the practice of growing two or more crops on the 
same field so that the land is not exposed to erosion. 
F Controlling livestock populations. 
F Developing improved grass types that can feed more livestock. 
F Installing fences to control the movement of grazing animals, thereby 
restricting their activities and protecting the areas outside of the fences.
F Proper construction of tracks and routes so that drainage could not 
wash them easily. 
F Constructing check dams. 
F Installing shelter-belts and windbreaks in arid and semi-arid areas. 
Grade 12 Geography 146
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia 
F Extending irrigation schemes along the major river basins and their 
tributaries so that water will be available in proper quantities at proper 
times. This measure would alleviate both drought and flood conditions. 
Stored water would be used during dry periods, and flood waters would 
be controlled and therefore would no longer be destructive or wasteful.
Activity 3.12
1 Collect a sample of your locality’s predominant soil type in a small plastic 
container. Then examine it so as to: 
a Identify its color. 
b Check whether it has high clay content. Use your saliva to perform this 
check, as follows: Wet it and press it with your finger. If you find that the 
soil is sticky then it has significant clay content. 
c Is it friable? Ask your community’s farmers. 
d What crops are widely grown in your area?
2 Are there gullies near your school? How wide are they? Ask older members of 
your community whether the gullies have changed in size over the years. What 
do you think will happen to them after ten or eight years?
3 Are attempts being made to check soil erosion in your locality? If not, organize 
a conservation club with your friends, classmates or community members with 
the goal of planting trees in your area. Locate trees to plant, and then create a 
schedule for planting them. You will be performing a noble task.
Unit 3: Physical Geography Of Ethiopia And The Horn 147
3.6 Soils Of Ethiopia Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY 
Þ Ethiopia and the Horn countries occupy a tropical location in Eastern Africa 
within the 1oS – 18oN latitudes and the 33oE – 51o24’ E longitudes. 
Þ The countries of the Horn vary in size. Ethiopia is the biggest while Djibouti 
is the smallest. This variation of size among the countries has resulted in 
advantages and disadvantages. 
Þ Regarding shape, Ethiopia and Djibouti have more or less compact shapes, 
while Somalia and Eritirea have elongated shapes. 
Þ Ethiopia and the other Horn countries have experienced four geological 
eras. The geological structure of the region is the result of the geological 
events that occurred during these eras. 
Þ The landforms of Ethiopia and the Horn are largely the results of the 
geological forces that took place in the Cenozoic era’s, Tertiary and 
Quaternary periods. Altitudes increase from the peripheries to the centers. 
The highest peak is Ras Dashen (4620 meters) in Ethiopia. 
Þ The altitude plays a significant role in determining the climate, natural 
vegetation, drainage systems as well human activities in the region. 
Þ Due to the altitude effect we see spatial variation of 
F Temperature; 
F Rainfall 
F Vegetation 
F Population density
Þ The drainage system itself is the altitudinal effects, rivers as flow out from 
the central highlands to the peripheral lowlands. This has made the rivers 
flow swiftly. 
Þ The highlands are homes of different wild animals of which some are 
endemic. These endemic animals are at the risk of extinction. 
Þ Although the forests are confined to the highlands, human intervention for 
both economic and other purposes is destroying it at an alarming rate. 
The forest resource stock that had covered 40 percent of the country has 
come to less than 3 percent these days. 
Þ Ethiopia has different types of soils. The volcanic soil, especially nithosol, is 
the most widely utilized soil. The country’s cereals, coffee, inset, etc. are 
grown on this soil type. However, the topography, climate and traditional 
practices have become major accelerants of its removal. Attempts have 
Grade 12 Geography 148
Unit Review
been underway to check erosion. Awareness is being created at all levels 
through school syllabi and extension services to mitigate the problem. 
Þ Soils are the upper most loose or unconsolidated material overlying the 
earth’s crustal rocks. Soils of Ethiopia owe their origin from their parentmaterials. They are basically derived from crystalline, volcanic and 
mesozoic sedimentary rocks. The main types of soil in Ethiopia are nithosols, 
vertisols, acrisols, cambisols, regosols, xerosols, yermisols, luvisols, fluvisols 
and lithosols. 
Þ The major problems of Ethiopia’s soils is erosion by running water. Both 
human-made and natural factros are responsible for erosion. 
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 3 
I Short Answers 
1 Describe the major geological events that occurred during the Cenozoic 
Tertiary Period in Ethiopia and the Horn. 
2 Identify the dominant factors that determine the drainage systems and 
change patterns in Ethiopia and the Horn. 
3 Name two areas in Ethiopia with 
a high rainfall variability b very low rainfall variability 
4 Which soil classes in Ethiopia are very unproductive? What are the reasons 
for this unproductivity?
5 Which regional administration is involved in the protection of wild animals 
and conservation of areas for them? Name at least four of Ethiopia’s 
protected wild animals. 
II Completing Sentences: Complete the sentences below by filling 
in the spaces left blank. 
6 The two non-anthropogenic factors that accelerate soil erosion in Ethiopia 
are __________ and __________.
7 One of the attainable measures for reducing soil erosion is afforestation. It 
is the __________.
8 The year-round rainfall region corresponds to __________.
9 The current economic potential of the Ethiopian Rift Valley is assumed to 
be __________.
