A human population is all of the people living in a specified area-such as a city, 
region, country, or continent-at a given time. Population is one of the most critical 
factors that determine the socio-economic and environmental conditions of every 
country in the world.
The issue of population is multi-disciplinary, so it is studied by a variety of fields, 
such as demography, geography, sociology, anthropology, economics, biology, 
statistics, and history. In geography, population geography is a branch of human 
geography that usually focuses on the spatial patterns and variations of the various 
characteristics of human populations. It particularly emphasizes the spatial 
dimensions of population size, structure, composition, distribution, settlement, 
density, migration, growth, and other demographic processes and facts. It also 
considers demographic facts in terms of both their present contexts and causes, 
characteristics and possible consequences to the geographical environments (i.e., 
both the physical and cultural environment).
Population studies in geography and other fields yield knowledge essential for 
planning, especially by governments, in fields such as health, education, housing, 
social security, employment, food security, and environmental preservation. 
Moreover, the studies provide information needed in the formulation of 
governments’ population policies, which seek to modify the trends of population 
size, composition, and distribution in order to achieve economic, social, and 
environmental objectives.
This unit focuses on the study of the general features of Ethiopia’s population. 
The unit has nine sections, which present major topics such as population 
theories, trends of population growth, population structure and composition, 
spatial distribution and settlement patterns determinants of population growth, 
nature of urbanization, and population policy.
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 151
Introduction 4.1 Population Theories
4.1 POPULATION THEORIES
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ analyze the population theories of Malthusian and anti-Malthusian.
Key Terms
³ Theory 
³ Malthusian
³ Anti-Malthusian
³ Over-population 
³ Preventive-checks 
³ Positive-checks 
³ Food supply 
³ Resource 
What do you know about theories?
How do you think a theory is developed?
The problem of population, particularly population growth, has been a major 
concern of mankind since ancient times. Based on political, social, economic, 
and military considerations, statesmen and thinkers held opinions about the need 
to stimulate or retard population growth. On the basis of these factors, they also 
formulated public policies. In ancient times, such policies were not based on 
theories. However, those policies and practices have been used as starting points 
for modern population theories.
Modern population theory is generally thought to have evolved in the late 
eighteenth century, in the writings of Malthus. Malthus’s work stimulated interest 
in population and in the economic and social issues associated with it. His work 
also prompted controversy, and that controversy spurred further investigation into 
demographic problems, which stimulated continuing observation and analysis of 
these issues, which, in turn, led to formulation of other population theories. 
With the help of the theories, various scholars have attempted to explain the 
relationships that exist between population and factors such as resources, 
economy, politics, and other social issues. 
Grade 12 Geography 152
4.1 Population Theories
Focus
The main purpose of population theory is to seek appropriate answers to 
the following population-related questions.
FHow large can world population ultimately become, and more 
particularly how many human beings can the planet feed and the 
environment sustain?
FHow does population growth determine the socio-economic issues of 
countries?
FHow do biological, economic, social, and political factors determine 
population growth?
The theories of population developed by different scholars, in response to the 
above questions, can be grouped into two broad categories: Malthusian/neoMalthusian and anti-Malthusian. The two groups of theories have opposing 
views about the relationship between population growth and socio-economic, 
political, and environmental factors. Malthusian and neo-Malthusian theories are 
pessimistic, and the anti-Malthusian theories are optimistic. 
The next figure indicates the characteristics and differences between these two 
types of population theory.
A Malthusian (Malthus) B Anti-Malthusian (Boserup)
Decreased Fertility/Birth
Decrease in 
Population 
Growth
Increased Mortality/Death
Less Food per Person
Increased Demand for Food
Population Increase
Population Growth Continues 
Increased Demand for Food
Population Increase
Improvement in Technology
Figure 4.1: The opposing views of Malthusian and anti-Malthusian 
population theories
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 153
4.1 Population Theories 4.1 Population Theories
Activity 4.1
Study the two diagrams in Figure 4.1 to investigate the opposing views of Malthusian and 
anti-Malthusian population theories. In small groups, discuss the following questions.
1 What do the two diagrams in the figure tell us about the differences between 
the two theories? 
2 Identify the optimistic one and the pessimistic one, regarding the effects of 
population growth. Discuss your reasons.
3 Which one do you support? Discuss your reasons.
4.1.1 Malthusian Population Theory
In his work, Malthus warned of a constant tendency for human population growth 
to exceed food production. He classified the various ways that such growth would, 
in consequence, be slowed. 
Malthus took an exceedingly pessimistic view, arguing that human populations 
are inescapably caught in a conflict between their “need for food” and the “passion 
between the sexes”. 
Focus
In his essay, Malthus put forward the following three basic propositions.
FPassion between sexes is inevitable and universal;
FFood production is limited, and population cannot increase beyond the 
means of subsistence; and 
FIf population growth outstrips the means of subsistence, “positive 
checks” will apply.
Historical Note
Thomas Robert Malthus (1766-1834) was an influential English 
economist who founded the science of modern demography. 
His theory, which appeared in 1798 in “An Essay on the 
Principle of Population”, was an important work that marked 
the beginning of modern population theories.
Thomas Robert Malthus
Grade 12 Geography 154
4.1 Population Theories
Activity 4.2
Read the following edited excerpt from Malthus’s “Principle of Population” and discuss 
in your group what he tried to say about the causes, consequences, and solutions of 
population growth.
Malthus was concerned that population would grow faster than the supply 
of food. He believed that the supply of food can only increase by a constant 
amount, in arithmetical progression (1 – 2 – 3 – 4 – 5), but that the 
human population has a tendency to multiply in geometric progression, 
(1 – 2 – 4 – 8 – 16), multiplying itself by a constant amount each time. Therefore, 
eventually population would outstrip food supply until a catastrophe occurred. 
This would be in the form of famine, diseases or war. Such catastrophes would 
occur as human beings fought over increasingly scarce resources. 
Malthus referred to the catastrophes as positive checks that control fast population 
growth and in the long term maintain a balance between population and resources.
Malthus considered that, in order to avoid the inevitable occurrence of the 
positive checks, human beings should adopt preventive checks. By preventive 
checks, Malthus meant “moral restraint”, which includes late marriage, avoiding 
sexual conduct before marriage and having fewer children. However, Malthus 
was against family planning methods; he was totally against all artificial methods 
of conception or birth control. Malthus, therefore, appealed to people to control 
their natural sexual urges in order to control the fast growth of population and to, 
therefore, avoid the occurrences of the disastrous positive checks.
The passion between the sexes is so great that human beings will 
produce more and more children, until there is not enough food for 
all…. The power of population growth is indefinitely greater than 
the power in the earth to produce subsistence for man. Hence there 
must be strong and constantly operating checks on population to 
prevent difficulty of subsistence, followed by violent competition for 
increasingly scarce resources. Gigantic, inevitable famine stalks in the 
rear of misery and vice to limit the numbers of mankind.
 Malthus’s “Principle of Population” 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 155
4.1 Population Theories 4.1 Population Theories
Focus
In general, Malthus believed that the “hot passion or sexual urge” of people 
could lead to overpopulation, which, in turn, would result in poverty and 
other catastrophes (positive checks). He concluded that “the poor are to be 
blamed for their own poverty. Neither wages nor providence, nor society 
is to be blamed.”
Today, supporters of Malthus’s pessimistic view, who fear that population 
growth will outstrip food supply and other resources, leading to the catastrophic 
consequences (the positive checks) predicted by Malthus, are called Malthusians or neo-Malthusians.
Activity 4.3
In small groups:
1 Discuss Malthus’s positive checks, and his idea of using preventative checks, as 
a way of controlling rapid population growth.
2 Discuss what Malthus meant by the statement “the poor are to be blamed for 
their own poverty”. 
4.1.2 Anti-Malthusian Population Theories
Anti-Malthusians are optimists who argue against Malthus. They believe that 
either population growth will slow down well before it is limited by scarcity of 
food and other resources or the ingenuity/cleverness of humankind will solve the 
problems, overcoming potential scarcities of food and other resources.
Let’s consider two anti-Malthusian theories – one was developed by Karl Marx, 
and the other by Ester Boserup.
Grade 12 Geography 156
4.1 Population Theories
A Marxian Population Theory 
In his theory, Marx stated that there could be no population problem under a 
socialist mode of production and of ownership of resources. He believed that 
population becomes a problem of surplus people only under capitalist modes of 
production. His view was that the capitalist system not only views some of the 
population as surplus in an economic sense, but also causes this phenomenon: 
When existing food supplies are inadequate to support some of the population, 
capitalism calls the unsupported people surplus population. However, Marx stated, 
such food scarcities are purely the result of unequal distribution of resources by 
capitalism.
Marx believed that the capitalist system can produce food and other necessities 
for an indefinitely expanding population, and that it is only capitalism’s unequal 
distribution of social wealth that makes it seem as though these resources were 
limited and, therefore, that population growth must have a natural limit.
Moreover, in Marx’s view, the system of capitalist production is not targeted to 
meet the needs of poor people. Instead, its aim is to increase the accumulation of 
capital for the wealthy. Along the same lines, Marx stated that capitalism benefits 
from the conditions that produce a so-called surplus population. Those conditions 
create competition for jobs, thus driving down wages and therefore maximizing 
profits for the wealthy. Marx’s solution to the problem of overpopulation was 
socialism with a new economic structure of society within a new social order. 
Historical Note
Karl Marx (1818-1883) was an influential German economist, 
revolutionary, political thinker, sociologist, socialist, and all 
round major figure historian, of the 19th century. He was 
one of the leading opponents of Malthus. Marx’s “surplus 
population theory” was a reaction to malthus’s theory.
Karl Marx
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 157
4.1 Population Theories 4.1 Population Theories
Focus
While Malthus focused on individual actions and considered “moral 
restraint” (preventive checks) to be the solution to population problems, 
Marx focused on the economic structure of society and believed the solution 
would be found in a new social order.
Activity 4.4
Summarize the opposing views of Malthus and Marx on the following issues.
a How did their views differ regarding the relationship between the scarcity of 
food (and other resources) and rapid population growth?
b How did their views differ about poor people? 
c How did their solutions to overpopulation and its problems differ?
B Boserupian Population Theory
Boserup formulated an optimistic theory about the influence of population growth 
on agricultural development in support of her theory; she elaborated facts that 
showed population growth would lead to agricultural development. For Boserup, 
population is a variable that contributes positively to agricultural development, 
because it leads human-kind to innovation.
In order to explain the positive effect of population growth on agriculture, 
Boserup presented the following series of historical agricultural transformations 
that were caused by population growth, in which humans progressed from “a” 
Historical Note
Esther Boserup (1910-1999) was a Danish economist of the 
20th century. In 1965, she developed a “Theory on Population 
and Agriculture”, in which she argued against Malthus. In her 
theory, Boserup argued that technological advancement 
would ensure that food supply would keep up with population 
growth. Esther Boserup
Grade 12 Geography 158
4.1 Population Theories
through “e” in their approach to agriculture between the nth and nth centuries. For 
each transformation, Boserup 
F described the approach to agriculture of the specified time and explained 
how it used land
F examined the labor requirements of that approach between the nth and 
nth centuries
Boserup noted that, as the human population grew, the amount of land available 
per-capita shrank but that, in response, people developed more effective ways 
to use the land. With each development in land use, labor requirements grew, 
and the increasing population provided the labor – and, therefore, the means to 
implement these developments. In addition, the increased labor requirements 
provided occupation for the growing number of people.
a Forest-Fallow Cultivation
F Long periods of forest growth alternate with short periods of cultivation. 
F Per-capita, the population owns and must cultivate large areas of 
land. However, because the work required - and therefore the labor 
requirement - of the forest-fallow approach to cultivation is low, food 
supplies are adequate.
b Bush-Fallow Cultivation
F Relatively long periods of bush growth alternate with short periods of 
cultivation. The bush-growth periods are not longer than the forestgrowth periods.
F The labor requirement is larger than for the first (forest-fallow) 
approach.
c Short-Fallow Cultivation
F The land is cultivated with intervals of only a few years of abandonment. 
These intervals last only for only a few years. They allow the land to 
regenerate and are used to enhance its productivity.
F The labor requirement is larger than for the first two approaches.
d Annual Cropping
F The land is cultivated annually.
F Fertilizers are required.
F Labor requirement is larger than for all of the earlier approaches.
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 159
4.1 Population Theories 4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia
e Multiple Cropping
F Different crops are grown at the same time, on the same land, throughout 
the year. The land is used throughout the year.
F The labor requirement is larger than for all of the earlier approaches.
Boserup concluded that population growth could not be controlled by scarcity 
of food and other necessities, as Malthus believed. Instead, population would 
continue to grow because the increased demand for food and other necessities 
would lead to new innovations and technological advancement which, in turn, 
would allow production to keep pace with the needs of the increasing population. 
Activity 4.5
Summarize the opposing views of Malthus and Boserup on the relationship between 
the scarcity of food and population growth.
Focus
Boserup thought that “As the size of population increases, it results in 
technological innovations and advancement.” For her, population is an 
independent variable/factor, and agriculture is a dependent variable/factor. 
She believed that population growth could not be controlled by scarcity of 
food supply. Rather, the increasing demand for food caused by population 
growth would increase agricultural productivity by stimulating innovation 
in agricultural systems and technologies. In this regard, she said that 
“Necessity is the mother of invention”.
4.2 TRENDS OF POPULATION GROWTH AND 
STRUCTURE IN ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ explain the trends of population growth and structure in Ethiopia.
Grade 12 Geography 160
4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia
Key Terms
³ Census 
³ Survey 
³ Growth rate 
³ Age structure 
³ Sex structure 
³ Population pyramid 
³ Age dependency ratio 
³ Sex ratio 
4.2.1 Trends of Population Growth in 
Ethiopia
What do you know about census and surveys? What do you know about the 
nature of population growth in Ethiopia?
The most important source of population information (demographic data) that 
enables us to understand population growth rate and its trends in a country is a 
census. Census is defined as the periodic counting of the entire population of a 
country. In Ethiopia, census is a recent phenomenon introduced after the late 20th 
century. 
In addition to census, from the 20th century onwards, several sample surveys were 
conducted in Ethiopia in order to estimate the total population of Ethiopia and to 
generate other reliable demographic data. 
Activity 4.6
In small groups, discuss the following questions.
1 What are the advantages of conducting census and surveys for any country? 
That is, what is the use of understanding the trends of population growth in any 
country by conducting census and surveys? 
2 Why is the Ethiopian population growing so fast?
Ethiopia is the third most populous country in Africa, next to Nigeria and Egypt. 
According to the 2007 Census, the population of Ethiopia is 73.8 million. The 
country’s population is among the fastest growing in the world. The 2008 estimate 
of the annual growth rate of Ethiopian population is 2.23 percent.
It was estimated that, in 1900, Ethiopia had only 11.8 million persons. This 
number increased to about 13 million in 1920 and to 23.5 million in 1960, as is 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 161
4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia 4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia
shown in (Table 4.1). The table shows that, in 1960, the country had twice the 
population it had in 1900 . These values show that, during those decades, it took 
60 years for the population to double in size. In contrast, since 1960, the time 
required for the population to double has been on the decline. This is because 
of rapid rate of population growth. For instance, the population doubled in size 
between 1960 and 1987, indicating a doubling time of only 27 years. 
A historical profile of the growth rates of the Ethiopian population since 1900 
shows that the population increased by less than 1.0 percent until about 1920. 
After 1920, however, the rate of growth slightly increased; and then, by 1950, it 
went up to 2.0 percent. The slow rate of population growth before 1920 reflected 
the country’s high mortality rate. With worldwide efforts to control malaria and 
other diseases in the 1950s and later, the growth rate rose from year to year 
and reached 2.8 percent in 1980. Between 1980 and 1990, the growth rate of 
Ethiopian population was around 3.0 percent. 
According to the results of the three census, there was a slight decline in the 
population growth rate over recent decades, changing from 3.1 percent in 1984 
to 2.9 percent in 1994, and to 2.0 percent in 2007. This was mainly the result of 
the government’s efforts to regulate fertility rates through the delivery of family 
planning services. Since 1987, family planning services have been rendered 
through government health institutions such as hospitals, clinics, and health 
centers.
Table 4.1: Population estimates and growth rates in Ethiopia (1900-2007)
YEAR 1900 1920 1940 1960 1970 1984 1994 2007
Population (Million) 11.8 12.9 16.3 23.5 29.5 42.6 53.5 73.8
Growth Rate (%) 0.2 1.0 1.5 2.2 2.8 3.1 2.9 2.0
Source: CSO (2009)
Focus
Although there has been a slight decline in the population growth rate 
between the three censuses, Ethiopia has one of the fastest growing 
populations in the world. Over the two decades between the three censuses, 
for instance, the population of Ethiopia increased from 42.6 million in 1984 
to 53.5 million in 1994 and to 73.8 in 2007.
Grade 12 Geography 162
4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia
4.2.2 Age and Sex Structure of the 
Ethiopian Population
What do you know about age and sex structure? What are the benefits of 
knowing the age and sex structures of a given population?
A Age Structure
Age structure is the distribution of a given population into age groups. This 
structure becomes clear after we group all of the people in that population by 
age. In other words, age structure is the pattern that results from the distribution 
of members of a population into different age categories. 
Two important statistical tools for understanding age structure are
F Age groups F Population pyramids
Age Groups: Although we can use different sets of numbers to define age groups, 
the most widely used age groups are the five-year age groups 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, …, 
60-64, 65+ and broad age groups 0-14, 15-64, 65+. 
In the broad age groups, age groups 0-14, 15-64 and 65+ are known, respectively, 
as young age (the young dependent population), working age (the economically 
active population) and old age (the elderly dependent population).
Table 4.2: Population of Ethiopia by Broad Age Groups and Census Periods 
(2007)
Age Group Population (%), by Census Year 
1984 1994 2007
0-14 49.8 45.4 45.0
15-64 50.2 51.4 51.8
65+ 3.4 3.2 3.2
Source: CSO (2009)
Population Pyramid: It is the graphic representation of the age distribution of a 
given population by sex. In countries where birth rates are high and death rates 
are also high, the population pyramid has the form of a triangle. This pattern is 
typical of the population of developing countries like Ethiopia, in which many 
children are born, but few reach old age. In contrast, in the developed countries, 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 163
4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia 4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia
with their lower birth rates and fewer people dying young, the population pyramid 
is more rectangular, narrowing only near its top. In these countries, both birth and 
death rates decline, with a result showing the number of people in each group at 
equivalent state.
Activity 4.7
Perform the following activity in small groups. Study the population pyramids of 
Ethiopia in Figure 4.2 and any other country for which you can get data.
Compare and contrast the two population pyramids and then write a short essay 
describing the characteristics of the populations of the two countries in connection 
with:
F the nature of the birth and death rates. 
F the distribution pattern of the child, young and old-age populations.
F the nature of the age-dependency ratio. 
Finally, choose a group representative who reads your essay to the class for further 
discussion.
20 15 10 5 0 5 10 15 20
0-04
25-29
5-09
30-34
50-54
10-14
35-39
55-59
15-19
40-44
60-64
70-74
20-24
45-49
65-69
75+
Population (percent)
Age Group
Figure 4.2: Population Pyramid of Ethiopia
Grade 12 Geography 164
4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia
In general, population pyramids of developing countries like Ethiopia have 
very broad bases, showing the dominance of the young-age population. These 
pyramids become increasingly narrower towards the top, advancing through the 
age groups, showing that the percentage of the population becomes less and less 
in the upper age groups (65-69, 70-74, etc.).
Focus
F Age structure/composition is one of the most important demographic 
characteristics of a population. 
F Age information is often used to understand the sizes of school-age, 
labor-force, elderly, and other populations.
F A population pyramid is usually employed to show the age distribution 
of a given population by sex. 
F The population pyramid of Ethiopia has a broad base that narrows 
towards the top as age increases. This shape is typical of a population 
with high fertility rate.
As shown in Table 4.2, Ethiopia’s young-age (0-14 years) dependent population 
declined from 49.8 percent in 1984 to 45.0 percent in 2007 but was still very 
large. In contrast, Ethiopia’s old-age (65+ years) dependent population was very 
small - only 3.2% in the 1994 and 2007 Census.
Although the proportion of the population of working-age group (15-64) has 
shown modest increases over the course of time of the three census, it accounts 
for only a little more than half of the total population.
The population pyramid for Ethiopia demonstrates that the country’s population 
as a whole has a high preponderance of young population, with a median age of 
not more than 18 years. This is a typical feature of a rapidly growing population. 
The high percentage for the young-age group in Ethiopia is the result of a high 
birth rate, while the small percentage of the old-age group reflects a high mortality 
rate, which accounts for the low life expectancy of the population of the country. 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 165
4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia 4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia
Age Dependency Ratio
What do you think age dependency is? Do you think that it is a problem in 
Ethiopia?
The Age Dependency Ratio (ADR) is the relationship between the working or 
economically active population and the non-working population. It is generally 
accepted that people in the young and old ages are dependent on the working-age 
population. The Age Dependency Ratio (ADR) is used to show the magnitude of 
this dependency in a given population. This means that the dependency burden, 
represented by the non-working population in the young and old age groups, 
on the working-age population can be shown by the age dependency ratio. The 
formula for calculating the age dependency ratio (ADR) is:
Activity 4.8
Use Table 4.2 to calculate the age dependency ratio of the Ethiopian population for 
the three census. Explain what these ADRs mean.
The age dependency ratio for more developed countries is usually between 50 
and 75. In contrast, less developed countries like Ethiopia have ratios between 
85 and 105. In Ethiopia, the age dependency ratio is very high. In other words, 
the dependency burden of the young and old age populations on the working or 
economically active population is very heavy. For example, the value of 93 for 
the age dependency ratio of Ethiopia in 2007 shows that for every 100 persons 
in the working-age group, there are about 93 dependents. In other words, every 
person in the working-age group has nearly one dependent.
Focus
The negative implications of heavy youth dependency in Ethiopia can be 
summarized as follows. 
FEven higher levels of fertility are likely to be reached when the youth 
group reaches reproductive age.
ADR = (% of population aged 0 14) + (% of popul − ation aged 65+)
% of population aged 15 64
 × 100 −
Grade 12 Geography 166
4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia
FThe capacity to save is highly constrained at both the household and the 
national level. 
FLimited national resources must be diverted from investment and other 
developmental activities in order to use those resources to provide 
services and meet the young peoples’ basic needs, such as food, housing, 
education, health care, etc.
FThe demand for the nation’s employment opportunities will increase 
as the youth group reaches working age; this results in a further high 
levels of unemployment. 
In general, knowing about the age structure of a country’s population helps its 
policy-makers and socio-economic planners to predict for the future what sorts of 
goods and services might be needed for how many people in which age group. As 
we have said, a large proportion of children means growing demands for schools; 
a large number of people entering their child-bearing years signals probable 
population growth; an increasing number of elderly people may strain pension 
plans and health services.
The age structure of a population also affects its growth rates. A population that has 
been growing rapidly will keep growing even when current birth rates slow down 
to replacement levels. This is because, when the large child population reaches its 
reproductive years, it will reproduce offsprings, unless that reproduction is kept 
at replacement level. In fact, reproduction will create an even larger new youth 
population. Thus, because the same thing is likely to happen again when that new 
generation reaches its reproductive years, the danger of a rising population spiral 
becomes higher and higher. For example, in Ethiopia, even if there were slight 
declines in the average number of children that each woman has, (Total Fertility 
Rate) in future years, these children will reproduce, producing more individuals 
than their own generation contains. Thus, the population of the country will 
continue to expand.
B Sex Structure
What is sex structure? What are the benefits of knowing the sex structure of a 
given population?
The sex structure of a population is shown by its sex ratio, which is the ratio 
of male population to female population. Sex ratio is usually expressed as the 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 167
4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia 4.2 Trends Of Population Growth And Structure In Ethiopia
number of males per 100 females in a population. A ratio greater than 100 shows 
a greater number – called an excess – of males than females. The formula for 
calculating a sex ratio is:
Activity 4.9
In small groups, discuss the following questions.
1 Why do sex ratios differ both between and within countries?
2 Why do sex ratios vary among different age groups?
The sex ratio of Ethiopia’s population increased from 99.4 in 1984 to 101.3 in 
1994; and to 101.9, in 2007. The low sex ratio during the 1980s appears to be due 
to political unrest and civil war. During those years, a large number of the male 
population was killed or was forced to migrate to other countries to escape being 
killed or forcibly conscripted into the military. 
Table 4.3: Sex ratios of Ethiopian population, by area 
Census Year Rural Urban Nation
1984 100.9 86.8 99.4
1994 102.6 93.3 101.3
2007 102.5 98.8 101.9
Source: CSO (2009)
As you can see in the Table 4.3 above, Ethiopia’s sex ratios vary between rural 
and urban areas; furthermore, rural ratios are higher. The table also shows that 
the 1984 Census showed Ethiopia’s national sex ratio to be 99.4, which means 
that there were about 99 males for every 100 females. The respective figures for 
the rural and urban populations were 100.9 and 86.8. The 1994 Census indicated 
that the national sex ratio had increased to 101.3. The respective figures for rural 
and urban populations are 102.6 and 93.3. The 2007 Census showed Ethiopia’s 
national sex ratio as 101.9, and that of the rural and urban as 102.5 and 98.8, 
respectively. 
Sex Ratio Male Population
Female Population = × 1 00
Grade 12 Geography 168
4.3 The Spatial Distribution Of Population In Ethiopia
Sex ratio in Ethiopia also varies with age. As you now know, males predominate 
among newborns and the very young. However, their numbers lessen as age 
increases. Hence, sex ratios are high for young age groups and low for adult and 
old-age groups. However, in rural areas this pattern does not hold for later age 
groups. In the country, the situation of more male than female newborns accounts 
for the normal high sex ratio in the young age groups. Then, the usual situation of 
higher mortality among male than female children narrows the gap, which gives 
the normal drop in sex ratio. By the time these children reach their twenties and 
thirties, the ratio is below 100. However, in their later age groups, this trend – and 
with it, the normal development of a population’s sex-ratio pattern – is reversed. 
This is because more rural females than males migrate to urban areas. In the 
above 50 age groups, males predominate in the countryside, and the sex ratio 
rises. After age 70, the rural ratio exceeds 120. 
4.3 THE SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF 
POPULATION IN ETHIOPIA
At the end of this lesson, you will be able to:
Þ discuss the spatial distribution of population in Ethiopia.
Key Terms
³ Population distribution 
³ Population density 
³ Dense population 
³ Sparse population 
Do you know what population distribution means? How about population 
density?
Note
Sex ratios in Ethiopia are generally lower for urban areas and 
higher for rural areas. This is primarily due to large number of 
females migrating to urban areas.
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 169
4.3 The Spatial Distribution Of Population In Ethiopia 4.3 The Spatial Distribution Of Population In Ethiopia
Population distribution refers to the way how population spreads out over a given 
area, i.e., of any size from a small area to the earth as a whole. The distribution 
of population is indicated by population density. 
Population density is the average number of people per square kilometer in a 
given area. 
Activity 4.10
Use the table given below to answer the questions that follow it.
Ethiopia in 1994
Total population 53,477,265
Rural population 46,154,058
Total area (km2
) 1,106,000
Arable land (km2
) 969,680
Cultivated land (km2
) 185,177
1 Calculate the crude density of Ethiopia in 1994.
2 Interpret the results you obtained for each measure.
In Ethiopia, the population is unevenly distributed for various physical and humanrelated reasons. In the nation, people mostly live in areas with agreeable life 
conditions such as moderate climate, adequate supply of water, good vegetation 
cover, fertile soil and absence of disease causing-insects. For such preferences, 
most people are found concentrated in the highlands and plateaus of the country. 
These places have the country’s most favorable natural conditions for settlement 
and crop cultivation. Therefore, they have attracted denser populations than the 
lowlands. The highlands, where there are no vector-born diseases, have generally 
been the areas of high population concentration. On the other hand, the lowlands 
are of low population concentration. Thus, 77 percent of the population of Ethiopia 
lives in the highlands at altitudes above 1800 meters, and only 11 percent lives at 
altitudes below 1400 meters.
Grade 12 Geography 170
4.3 The Spatial Distribution Of Population In Ethiopia
Densely and Sparsely Populated Areas of Ethiopia
We can clearly see wide variations in population distribution and density among 
the various regions of the country. To understand this better, study the following 
table, which shows the total population, and total area of each region of the 
country.
Table 4.4: Regional Distribution of Population in Ethiopia (2007)
Region Total Population Total Area (km2
)
Tigray 4,316,988 50,078.64
Afar 1,390,273 96,707
Amhara 17,221,976 159,201.66
Oromiya 26,993,933 353,006.81
Somali 4,445,219 209,252
Benishangul 784,345 49,281.46
SNNP 14,929,548 112,343.19
Gambela 307,096 25,802.01
Harari 183,415 311.25
Addis Ababa 2,739,551 530.14
Dire Dawa 341,834 1,213.20
Source: CSA, Statistical Report of the 2007 Census
Persons per square km
< 5
6 - 10
11 - 25
26 - 50
51 - 100
101 - 150
151 - 250
251 - 350
> 350
Woredas
Figure 4.3: Population Density in Ethiopia
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 171
4.3 The Spatial Distribution Of Population In Ethiopia 4.3 The Spatial Distribution Of Population In Ethiopia
Spatial distributions of population by region vary significantly. Table 4.4 shows 
that the percentage share of the regions ranges from the smallest proportion of 0.5 
percent in the Harari region to the largest, 36.6 percent, in the Oromiya region. 
That is, the largest proportion of population is found in the Oromiya region 
(26,993,933) while the smallest proportion of persons is in the Harari region 
(183,415). The Amhara region (17,221,976) and the SNNP region (14,929,548) 
have the second and third largest population in the country, respectively. 
Activity 4.11
Use the data in Table 4.4 to calculate the crude density for each region.
Excluding Addis Ababa, Dire Dawa, and Harari Regions, (which are mostly urban areas 
with relatively small geographical sizes) identify the three most densely populated 
and three most sparsely populated regions of Ethiopia. 
In terms of density of population, Addis Ababa, Dire Dawa, and Harari Regions 
have exceptionally different and much higher population densities than the 
rest of the nation. This is because they are urban-dominated regions with high 
population concentration in very small geographical areas. Excluding these 
regions, the most densely populated region in Ethiopia is the Southern Nations, 
Nationalities and Peoples Region (SNNP) (133 persons/km2
), followed by the 
Amhara (108.2 persons/km2
) and Tigray (86.2 persons/km2
) regions. On the other 
hand, the Somali, Afar and Gambela regions are the most sparsely populated 
regions in the country. 
When population densities are considered in terns of zones, the variation of 
population density in Ethiopia is generally greater than the differences among the 
regions. Nation wide, there are several zones with population densities of over 
200 persons per square kilometer. Some of the zones with very high population 
Note
According to the 2007 Census, Ethiopia had significant variation 
of population distribution between the rural and urban areas. 
At the national level, 83.9 % of the total population lives in 
rural places, while the urban population accounts for only 
16.1 %.
Grade 12 Geography 172
4.4 Factors Affecting Population Distribution In Ethiopia
densities are Ghedeo (424 persons/km2
), Sidama (299 persons/km2
), KembataAlaba-Tembaro (299 persons/km2
) and Hadiya (264 persons/km2
). In contrast, 
there are zones with population densities of less than 10 persons per square 
kilometer, two of which are Kamashi (5.7 persons/km2
) and Metekel (7.7 persons/
km2
). Some of the zones in the Somali and Afar regions, for which densities have 
not been calculated, have even lower densities.
4.4 FACTORS AFFECTING POPULATION 
DISTRIBUTION IN ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ state factors affecting population distribution in Ethiopia. 
Key Terms
³ Altitude 
³ Soil fertility 
³ River valley 
³ Tropical disease 
³ Crop farming 
³ Nomadic herding 
You can easily see from the preceding information, that the distribution of 
population in Ethiopia is extremely uneven. This extreme unevenness is the result 
of a number of factors operating in combination. These factors can be grouped 
into two as: physical and human. 
4.4.1 Physical Factors
Do you know the reasons for the significant variation of population distribution 
over the highlands and lowlands of Ethiopia?
The most significant physical factors affecting the distribution of population in 
Ethiopia are the following.
F Climate (mainly rainfall and temperature)
F Soil fertility
F Natural water supply
F Relief (slope and altitude)
F Vegetation cover
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 173
4.4 Factors Affecting Population Distribution In Ethiopia 4.4 Factors Affecting Population Distribution In Ethiopia
Activity 4.12
In small groups discuss the following questions.
1 What are the major factors that attract large populations to the highland areas 
of Ethiopia for settlement?
2 Why are the lowland areas of Ethiopia sparsely populated?
3 In most parts of the world, valleys of major rivers are zones of large concentrations 
of population. In contrast, the valleys of major rivers of Ethiopia are areas of 
sparse population distribution. Why is this so?
In Ethiopia, most of the physical factors are influenced by altitude. Therefore, 
altitude is the most crucial physical factor influencing patterns of population 
distribution and settlement in the country. Studies in climatology make it clear 
that rainfall increases while temperature decreases with an increase in altitude. 
Incidentally, this means that rainfall is very low and temperature is high in 
lowland areas, while rainfall is high and temperature moderately low in the 
highlands. Since soil formation and vegetation growth are closely associated 
with adequate rainfall and moderate temperature, highlands tend to have better 
soils and vegetation cover. 
Lowlands in Ethiopia are characterized by scarcity of rainfall, high temperature, 
and poor vegetation and soil conditions. In addition to these negative factors, the 
prevalence of tropical diseases such as malaria and yellow fever contributes to 
the sparse population distribution in such areas. 
For reasons of tropical diseases, most of the valleys of the major rivers of Ethiopia 
are also characterized by sparse population concentration. The main exception is 
the Awash River Valley, where irrigation agriculture is practiced. This overall 
pattern differs from what can be seen in other parts of the world, where valleys 
of major rivers are zones of large concentrations of people. However, with 
improvements in agricultural and medical technology, Ethiopia’s lower major 
river valleys might, in the future, attract more people from the densely populated 
highland areas.
Grade 12 Geography 174
4.4 Factors Affecting Population Distribution In Ethiopia
Source: CSA (2007)
Table 4.5: The Relationship between Altitude and Population in Ethiopia
Altitude (Meters) Area (%) Population (%)
Above 2600 5.8 10.4
1800-2600 31.8 67.1
1400-1800 28.1 11.5
1000-1400 13.4 8.2
Below 1000 21.5 2.8
From the Table 4.5, we can understand that 77.5 percent of the population of 
Ethiopia lives in areas with altitudes above 1800 meters, and that these areas 
constitute only 37.6 percent of the total area of the country. Areas below 1800 
meters, which constitute about 63 percent of the total area of Ethiopia, supports 
only 22.5 percent of the total population of the country. This information 
clearly shows that altitude is the most significant physical factor that affects the 
distribution of population in Ethiopia.
4.4.2 Human Factors
Can you mention the major human factors that have influenced population 
distribution in Ethiopia?
The major human factors which have influenced population distribution in 
Ethiopia are the following.
Â Types of economic activity
Â Historical patterns of population movement
One dot = 500 people
Figure 4.4: The Physical and Population 
Density Maps of Ethiopia 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 175
4.4 Factors Affecting Population Distribution In Ethiopia 4.4 Factors Affecting Population Distribution In Ethiopia
Activity 4.13
In small groups, discuss this question.
Why do Ethiopia’s crop farming areas have high carrying capacities and high 
population densities, while its areas of pastoralists have low carrying capacities and 
low population densities?
A Types of Economic Activity
The types of economic activity performed in an area strongly influence the 
carrying capacity of that land. Consequently, the carrying capacity influences 
the number of people that can inhabit a given area. Being a country of diverse 
environmental and cultural conditions, Ethiopia offers ample evidence of these 
relationships. 
The arid and semi-arid lowland areas of Ethiopia are areas that are more suitable 
for pastoralist activities than for crop farming. By its nature, pastoralism is an 
economic activity that requires large areas of grazing lands. In most pastoralist 
areas of Ethiopia, the land requirement for grazing is as large as 20 hectares or 
more per head of cattle. Each household might possess hundreds of cattle, and as 
a result, people need large areas of grazing land. This forces them to move from 
one area to another in search of better pasture lands and water for their animals, 
as these resources become exhausted over time at each place of arrival.
Under such conditions, the distance separating one pastoralist community from 
another is usually be large. That is why pastoralism is considered as“greedy of 
space”. Due to these conditions, population densities are extremely low in areas of 
pastoralism.
Figure 4.5: Pastoralist 
Area in Ethiopia
Grade 12 Geography 176
4.4 Factors Affecting Population Distribution In Ethiopia
As has been said earlier, compared to pastoralist areas, crop-farming areas have 
greater carrying capacity and higher densities of population. This is typically 
the case in the highland areas of Ethiopia where natural conditions are suitable 
for crop cultivation. In the crop-farming highland areas, the land-man ratio is 
significantly higher than the one in the pastoralist lowlands. 
However, the crop-farming areas of Ethiopia do not have uniform carrying 
capacities or population densities. Population density is significantly influenced 
by the types of crops cultivated. For instance, in the northern and north central 
highland areas of Ethiopia, the most cultivated crops are cereals. Cereals have 
relatively low yields per unit area. Therefore, these areas tend to have relatively 
lower carrying capacities and population density. In contrast, the southern enset
and coffee growing regions of the country have greater yields per unit area. This 
is an important reason for the very high population densities in some zones and 
weredas of the southern region that you read about earlier. 
The development of commercial farms in some parts of Ethiopia, such as Awash
valley, is another significant factor in population movements and their resulting 
effects in population distribution. Some decades ago, there were very few people 
in the Awash valley. However, because of the development of many small and a 
few large commercial farms, several thousands of settled and migratory people 
are found there now.
In Ethiopia, urban and industrial growth/expansion are other human factors that 
bring about population re-distribution over time, and they are responsible for 
considerable spatial variation of population density at present.
B Historical Pattern of Population Movement
In the history of Ethiopia, the pattern of movement of two major groups of people 
Figure 4.6: Crop Farming Area in Ethiopia
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 177
4.4 Factors Affecting Population Distribution In Ethiopia 4.5 Settlement Patterns Of Ethiopian Population
had direct impact on the distribution of population in the country. These two 
groups, which make up the largest part of Ethiopia’s population, are the Semitic 
and the Cushitic populations. The two waves of population movement, one from 
the north (the Semitic) and the other from the south, (the Cushitic) led to the high 
concentration of people in and around the central highlands of Ethiopia.
4.5 SETTLEMENT PATTERNS OF ETHIOPIAN 
POPULATION
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ realize settlement patterns of Ethiopian population.
Key Terms
³ Settlement 
³ Urban settlement 
³ Rural settlement 
³ Villagization 
³ Nucleated settlement 
³ Dispersed settlement 
Activity 4.14
In small groups, discuss the following questions.
1 What do you know about the concept of settlement?
2 Do you know why settlement patterns differ from place to place in Ethiopia?
Focus
In Ethiopia, different settlement types have been developed in response to 
mainly the following and other physical and human factors. 
F Relief (altitude and slope of the land)
F Climate (the magnitude of rainfall and temperature)
F The kind of land ownership
F The level of development (transportation and industrialization)
F The need for community defense
F The need for communal field labor
Grade 12 Geography 178
4.5 Settlement Patterns Of Ethiopian Population
Ethiopian settlements are broadly categorized as rural and urban. The primary 
bases for this dichotomy are the dominant economic activities and the degree of 
population density. Urban settlements are usually branded by non-agricultural 
economic activities, while the rural settlements are typically agricultural. Leaving 
social, cultural and physiological differences aside, rural and urban settlements in 
Ethiopia can very well distinguished by population densities, which are generally 
very high in urban settlements compared to the relatively lower densities of 
population in rural settlement areas.
4.5.1 Rural Settlements
What kinds of settlements exist in the rural areas of Ethiopia?
Settlements in the rural areas of Ethiopia can be broadly grouped into two: 
permanent and temporary/mobile settlements.
Permanent Settlements
What kinds of settlements are considered as permanent? In which areas of 
Ethiopia that these types of settlements mostly found? Highlands or lowlands?
Settlements are considered permanent if their locations do not frequently change, 
i.e. if they remain in place for more than ten years. In this sense, most rural 
settlements over the highland areas of Ethiopia are permanent. The permanent 
rural settlements of Ethiopia are mostly associated with the crop-farming highland 
areas of the country. 
The permanent rural settlements of Ethiopia can also be broadly divided into 
two: the scattered (diffused or dispersed) settlements and the grouped (nucleated) 
settlements. In areas of scattered settlements, homesteads are separated by relatively 
long distances. On the other hand, the grouped settlements are characterized by a 
large number of homesteads/households concentrated in one place.
In Ethiopia, the Derg Regime’s compulsory villagization program resulted in the 
formation of grouped settlements (villages) in many parts of the country. In most 
parts of the northern regions of the country, such settlements have remained in 
place for years with the idea that they would enhance communal ownership of 
land and the provision of social services. But, because the program was conducted 
by forcing people into villages against their will, and because the services were 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 179
4.5 Settlement Patterns Of Ethiopian Population 4.5 Settlement Patterns Of Ethiopian Population
non-existent, people began to return to their original sites, in a manner of reversal 
move. This movement began even before the regime was overthrown. The current 
government of Ethiopia has recently conducted villagization programs that are 
based on peoples’ will to leave their original settlement sites.
Temporary Settlements
What kinds of settlements are temporary? Do you know the areas of Ethiopia 
in which these types of settlements mostly found? What do you think are the 
reasons?
The lowlands in most parts of the Rift Valley and peripheral areas of Ethiopia 
are characterized by pastoralism with temporary settlements. The settlements in 
these areas are temporary because the pastoralists have to look for new sites for 
water and pasture lands for their livestock when these resources are exhausted at 
each new site.
The major problem posed by mobile settlements in these pastoralist areas is the 
difficulty in providing the people with social services like clean wellspring water, 
schools, hospitals, electricity, etc. Because most of these services cannot move 
from place to place as do the pastoralists, the only way that the pastoralists could 
receive and benefit from them is by settling in permanent locations. However, 
making such a change can happen only after major alterations have been made 
in the peoples’ values and attitudes. The current government is involved in 
progressive activities to help the pastoralists make permanent settlements in a 
gradual manner.
4.5.2 Urban Settlements
What kinds of settlements are considered urban? Can you mention some 
examples of urban settlements in Ethiopia? Do you know the features that 
make urban settlements different from the rural settlements in Ethiopia?
Urban settlements include residence in cities and towns. The process of 
development of urban settlements is known as urbanization. In most parts of 
Africa, urbanization is a recent phenomenon, and is attributed to colonialism. 
Urbanization in Ethiopia is not influenced by European colonialism. It is an 
unplanned, natural phenomenon of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. 
Grade 12 Geography 180
4.5 Settlement Patterns Of Ethiopian Population
Focus
Not all grouped settlements are classified as urban centers. Different 
countries use different criteria for assigning the status of urban center to a 
settlement. The major criteria used in Ethiopia are
a the settlement has a minimum of 2000 people.
b two-thirds of the population in the settlement are engaged in nonagricultural activities.
c the settlement has a chartered municipality.
Historically, two major factors contributed to the development of urban centers 
in Ethiopia. They are: 
F The interconnection of the different parts of the country by all-weather 
roads, which radiate from Addis Ababa.
F The five-year Italian occupation, which intensified the construction of 
roads, and the development of small-scale industries and service-giving 
institutions. 
Most urban settlements of Ethiopia have developed along major transport routes, 
which have attracted people to settle in those areas. Consequently, the areas have 
turned into centers of greater transport-route network, home of larger numbers of 
urban populations and, generally, spot of higher population densities. 
Activity 4.15
In small groups, discuss this question.
Why are Ethiopia’s urban settlements concentrated along the nation’s major transport 
routes and networks.
Two main areas in the country have relatively large concentrations of urban 
populations: the Shewan and the Harerghe plateaus. Together, these regions 
account for more than 50 percent of the urban population of the country. The 
major reasons for this situation are:
F relatively high concentration of industries
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 181
4.5 Settlement Patterns Of Ethiopian Population 4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
F greater assemblage of social services, such as schools, health 
institutions, water supplies, electricity, transportation, etc.
Peoples’ needs for such facilities, services, and employment opportunities 
captivated urban setters to come to those places.
4.6 DETERMINANTS OF POPULATION 
CHANGE IN ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ compare fertility and mortality from a given data. 
Key Terms
³ Mortality 
³ Fertility 
³ Migration 
³ Natural increase 
³ Birth rate 
³ Death rate 
As you are aware from your previous classes in population geography, population 
change in any country is affected by three major factors: fertility (births), mortality 
(deaths), and migration (movement into or out of the nation). 
Focus
Population change in any country is the result of the following.
F The difference between fertility (births) and mortality (deaths), which 
is called natural increase.
F The balance between immigration (in-migration) and emigration 
(out-migration), which is known as net migration.
Look at Figure 4.7, below; it is an input-output model of population change.
Grade 12 Geography 182
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
 
Activity 4.16
In pairs, perform the following activity. 
Using the preceding input-output model of population change, categorize the four 
factors of change as an input or an output. Explain your reasons for each of your 
categorizations.
Example:
F Population of X at the beginning of the year: 5000
F Population change during the year:
The following example presents the population changes of a hypothetical 
population, X, during a given year. The changes are the result of births, deaths, 
immigration, and emigration.
Additions Losses
Births: 150 Deaths: 60
Immigrants: 20 Emigrants: 10
Rates of change based on the preceding data:
Birth Rate: 30/1000 Death rate: 12/1000 Rate of Natural Change: 
 +18/1000
Immigration rate: 4/1000 Emigration rate: 2/1000 Rate of Net Migration: 
 + 2/1000
Total population of X at the end of the year:
 = 5100 (5000 + 90 of natural change + 10 of net migration)
As indicated in the previous sections, Ethiopia is characterized by a high rate 
of population growth. Fertility and mortality are the most important factors 
Figure 4.7: Population change
Natural 
Increase Births Deaths 
Net Migration Immigrants Emigrants
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 183
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia 4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
contributing to high population growth nation wide. The effect of migration is 
insignificant. 
4.6.1 Fertility in Ethiopia
How does fertility determine the size and structure of the population of a 
country?
Fertility is one of the three principal components of population change that 
determine the size and structure of the population of a country. In its general 
sense, fertility refers to the occurrence of birth in a given country or region. 
Focus
Before studying the fertility characteristics of the population of Ethiopia, 
become familiar with the following measures of fertility. 
F Crude Birth Rate (CBR): this is the total number of births occurring 
in a given year, per 1000 population.
F General Fertility Rate (GFR): this one is the number of births 
occurring in a given year per 1000 women in the reproductive ages 
(i.e., women aged 15-49).
F Age Specific Fertility Rate (ASFR): this is the number of births that 
occur in a given year per woman in the reproductive ages, presented 
in five-year age groups.
F Total Fertility Rate (TFR): this is the number of children a woman 
may have produced by the end of her reproductive period, given the 
current ASFR.
Fertility Levels and Differentials in Ethiopia
Ethiopia, like most countries in sub-Saharan Africa, has rapid population growth, 
characterized by a high level of fertility. The result of the most recently conducted 
demographic and health survey of Ethiopia (EDHS 2005) indicate that the fertility 
level of Ethiopia’s population, as measured by TFR (5.4), GFR (179) and CBR 
(35.7), is among the highest in the world. 
There is also significant variation in fertility levels between the urban and rural 
populations of the country. As expected, fertility is considerably higher in the 
Grade 12 Geography 184
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
rural areas than the urban areas. For instance, EDHS 2005 showed that the TFR 
in rural areas was 6.0, which was almost two and half times higher than the 2.4 
TFR in urban areas. 
Study the following figure, which shows the level of fertility (TFR and CBR) for 
Ethiopia as a whole, and for its urban and rural areas. 
Activity 4.17
1 How do you interpret the following rates of fertility for the population of 
Ethiopia?
F TFR = 5.4 F CBR = 33.5 F GFR = 179
2 What are the reasons for the considerably higher rates of fertility in rural areas 
than urban areas in Ethiopia? 
3 The 6.0 TFR in rural areas is almost two and half times higher than the 2.4 TFR in 
the urban areas. What does this mean?
Focus
The total fertility rate (TFR) for Ethiopia is 5.4 children per woman. This 
means that the total number of children an Ethiopian woman would have by 
the end of her child-bearing period (reproductive age) is about 5.4 children.
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
TFR
Urban Rural Total
2.4
6.0
5.4
35
40
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
CBR
Urban Rural Total
23.4
35.7
37.3
Figure 4.8: Levels of Fertility in Ethiopia (TFR and CBR) (2005) 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 185
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia 4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
In Ethiopia, there are also substantial differentials in fertility among regions, 
ranging from a low TFR of 1.4 in Addis Ababa to a high of 6.2 in Oromyia.
With the exception of Somali and SNNP, fertility levels in the other regions are 
lower than the national average (5.4). Look at the following figure, which shows 
regional distribution of total fertility rate in Ethiopia. 
Focus
In general, fertility rates are high in Ethiopia due to the following major 
factors.
F Low levels of family planning practices, due to lack of awareness 
and religious beliefs;
F Early marriage, particularly of females;
F Perception of high social and economic value of children;
F Low social status of women; and
F Relatively high infant and child mortality (death) rates, which leads 
parents to produce larger number of offspring, in compensation.
4.6.2 Mortality in Ethiopia
How does mortality determine the size and structure of the population of a 
country?
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Dire Dawa
Addis Ababa
Harari
Gambela
Benishangul
SNNP
Somali
Oromiya
Amhara
Affar
Tigray
TFR
3.6
1.4
3.8
4
5.6
5.2
6
6.2
5.1
4.9
5.1
Figure 4.9: TFR by Region (2005)
Grade 12 Geography 186
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
Mortality is the second principal factor in population change that determines the 
size and structure of the population of a country. In its general sense, mortality is 
the occurrence of deaths in a given population. 
Focus
Before studying the mortality characteristics of Ethiopia’s population, 
become familiar with the following measures of mortality.
F Crude Death Rate (CDR): this is the total number of deaths occurring 
in a given year, per 1000 people.
F Infant Mortality Rate (IMR): this is the number of deaths in a year 
among infants under one year of age, per 1000 live births.
F Child Mortality Rate (CMR): this is the number of deaths in a year 
among children between one and five years of age, per 1000 children 
between the same ages.
F Under-Five Mortality Rate: this is the number of deaths in a year 
among infants and children between birth and five years of age, per 
1000 live births.
F Maternal Mortality rate (MMR): this is the annual number of 
maternal deaths occurring during pregnancy, child birth, or within 
two months after the birth or termination of pregnancy, per 1000 
women between 15 and 49 years of age (reproductive age).
F Adult Mortality Rate (AMR): this is the number of deaths in a year 
among adults between 15 and 49 years of age, per 1000 adults in 
the same age group.
F Age-Specific Death Rate (ASDR): this is the number of deaths that 
occur in a given year per 1000 of the population in five-year age 
group.
F Life Expectancy: this is the average number of years a newborn 
baby is expected to live if he/she is exposed throughout life to the 
prevailing pattern of age-specific death rates.
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 187
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia 4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
Levels and Differentials of Mortality in Ethiopia
In general, mortality rates have been declining around the world, including 
in Ethiopia. However, as in most countries in sub-Saharan Africa, Ethiopia is 
still characterized by a high level of mortality. The most recently conducted 
demographic and health survey of Ethiopia (EDHS 2005) showed that the 
mortality level of Ethiopia’s population, as measured by IMR (80), CMR (56), 
MMR (1.34) and AMR (5.99), is among the highest levels in the world. 
Activity 4.18
In pairs, work on the following questions.
How do you interpret the following mortality rates in Ethiopia?
F IMR = 80 F CMR = 56 F MMR = 1.34 F AMR = 5.99
Crude Death Rate
Do you know what crude death rate means and how it is calculated?
The crude death rate is the number of deaths per 1000 people during a given year. 
In 2005, there were just over than normal deaths in Ethiopia, for a CDR of deaths 
per 1000 population. However, the CDR of a given population reveals neither the 
age and sex patterns of mortality levels nor the socio-economic characteristics of 
a given population. Therefore, IMR, CMR, MMR, AMR and life expectancy are 
IMR CMR MMR AMR
 Mortality Rates of 
Ethiopia 80 56 1.34 5.99
Mortality Rates of Ethiopia (2005)
Rates per 1000
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Figure 4.10: Mortality levels in Ethiopia (2005)
Grade 12 Geography 188
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
generally regarded as better indicators than CDR of mortality in relation to the 
socio-economic characteristics of population of a given country.
Infant and Child Mortality 
What is the difference between infant and child mortality rates? What are the 
benefits of measuring infant and child mortality rates?
Infant mortality rates and child mortality rates are used, respectively, to indicate a 
countries’ health status and socio-economic development status. (Infant mortality 
rates and health status are considered more specific indicators and measures than 
are child mortality rates and socio-economic development status.). The analyses 
of these rates are thus useful in identifying needs and planning health programs 
and initiating child-survival efforts. In addition, these measures are useful for 
population projection.
Focus 
Infant mortality rate (IMR) is the number of deaths among infants between 
the moment of birth and the first birth day. Child mortality rate (CMR), on 
the other hand, is the number of deaths among children between the exact 
ages of one and five, (i.e. From the first birthday, up to but not including 
the sixth birth day). The under-five mortality rate, however, includes both 
IMR and CMR, as it refers to the number of deaths of infants and children 
between birth and the fifth birth day.
One of the targets of Ethiopia’s millennium development goal (MDG) is a 
two-thirds reduction in infant and child mortality by 2015, to be achieved 
by way of: 
F upgrading the proportion of births attended by skilled health 
personnel.
F increasing immunization against the six vaccine-preventable diseases.
F upgrading the status of women through education and enhancing 
their participation in the labor force. 
As shown in Figure 4.11, the IMR and CMR in Ethiopia in 2005 were 80 and 56, 
respectively. The under-five mortality rate for the same period was 132 deaths per 
1000 live births. This means that one in every thirteen (1/13) Ethiopian children 
died before reaching age one, while one in every eight (1/8) did not survive to 
the fifth birthday. 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 189
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia 4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
The IMR of Ethiopia’s population is not only significantly higher than the global 
average (52/1000), but is also much higher than the average in the less developed 
countries (57/1000). Ethiopia’s very high IMR is even more striking when we 
compare it with the lowest rates among the world’s developed countries, such 
as Japan (4.4/1000 – the lowest in the world), Sweden (5.7/1000), Finland 
(5.8/1000), Taiwan (6.0/1000), Switzerland (7.3/1000) and the USA (8.8/1000). 
Activity 4.19
Answer the following questions, based on Figure 4.11. 
1 Which area (urban or rural) has the highest rates of mortality?
2 Discuss the reasons for the differentials in childhood mortality rates for urban 
and rural areas of Ethiopia. 
It is clear that infant and child survival in Ethiopia is influenced by maternal 
socio-economic characteristics, and that those conditions differ between regions 
and between rural and urban areas. There is significant urban-rural and regional 
variation in child mortality levels. Mortality in urban areas is consistently lower 
than in rural areas. For example, EDHS 2005 showed that infant mortality in 
urban areas was 66 deaths per 1000 live births, compared to 81 deaths per 1000 
live births in rural areas. 
There are wide regional differentials in infant, child and under-five mortality 
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Infant Mortality Child Mortality Under-Five 
Mortality
Urban Rural
66
81
34
58
98
135
Figure 4.11: Mortality Rates in Ethiopia by Urban and Rural 
Residence (2005)
Grade 12 Geography 190
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia
levels in Ethiopia. The lowest level is that of Addis Ababa (72/1000), which is 
the most urbanized part of the country. On the other hand, the highest levels are in 
Benishangul-Gumuz (157/1000), Gambela (156/1000) and Amahara (154/1000). 
Focus
Survival of infants and children in Ethiopia is strongly influenced by 
maternal education and socio-economic status, age at birth, child birth 
order, birth interval, and gender. For instance, EDHS 2005 showed that: 
F Under-five mortality among children born to mothers with no 
education is more than twice as high as that among children born to 
mothers with secondary or higher education.
F Childhood mortality is higher among children born to mothers under 
age 20 and over age 40.
F Children born within two years of a preceding birth are more than 
three times as likely to die within the first year of life as are children 
born after an interval of three or more years. 
F First births and births of order seven and higher also suffer significantly 
higher rates of mortality than births of orders two to six.
F Male children experience higher mortality than female children.
F Children born at home with the help of traditional birth attendants 
experience higher mortality than those born in modern health centers 
with skilled medical personnel. 
Maternal Mortality
What do you think maternal mortality is? What are the benefits of measuring 
maternal mortality rates?
Maternal mortality is any death that occurred during pregnancy, childbirth, or 
within two months after a birth or termination of a pregnancy. Maternal mortality 
rate is the annual number of maternal deaths per 1000 women aged 15-49. Such a 
rate is an important indicator of reproductive health status, broadly, and maternal 
health status, specifically, of the population of a given country. 
The maternal mortality rate in Ethiopia is high, in relation to such rates in the 
developed countries. For instance, the average Ethiopian value for the maternal 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 191
4.6 Determinants Of Population Change In Ethiopia 4.7 Impacts Of Rapid Population Growth In Ethiopia
mortality rate for the period 1994-2005 was 1.34. The figure seems low, but 
during this period, maternal deaths in the country accounted for 21 percent of 
all deaths of women aged 15-49. In other words, more than one in five (1-5) 
Ethiopian women who died in this period died from pregnancy or pregnancyrelated causes. This shows how high the maternal mortality level is in Ethiopia. 
Activity 4.20
In small groups discuss, this question. 
Why does Ethiopia have a high rate of maternal mortality? 
4.7 IMPACTS OF RAPID POPULATION 
GROWTH IN ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ analyze the impact of rapid population growth on Ethiopia’s socioeconomic and environmental conditions.
Key Terms
³ Deforestation 
³ Pollution 
³ Environmental degradation 
³ Food scarcity 
³ Drought 
³ Famine 
³ Health care 
³ Housing 
³ Employment 
Can you mention some of the challenges of rapid population growth in 
Ethiopia? Can you mention some of the real problems that have resulted from 
population growth in your locality?
As we have already discussed, the size of Ethiopia’s population has been growing 
very rapidly. The population growth rate is much higher and is increasing much 
faster than the economic growth rate and is growing beyond the carrying capacity 
of the country’s natural resources, such as land, water, soil, forest, etc. These 
negative results of rapid population growth have caused many environmental and 
socio-economic problems. 
Grade 12 Geography 192
4.7 Impacts Of Rapid Population Growth In Ethiopia
For example, population growth causes serious environmental degradation in the 
area where it occurs, including deforestation, pollution, soil erosion, depletion of 
resources, etc.
Activity 4.21
In small groups, discuss these questions.
1 What do you know about global warming?
2 How does rapid population growth lead to environmental degradation?
4.7.1 Deforestation
What is deforestation? Can you mention some of the problems caused by 
deforestation? is deforestation a problem in your locality?
Forests are the lungs of the earth. They absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere 
and exhale oxygen. They also store energy from the sun, bind topsoil to land, and 
aid in climate control by capturing and releasing water. They also provide a habitat 
for innumerable species of plants and animals, serving as a global storehouse of 
genetic diversity.
The forest cover resource of Ethiopia has been declining significantly over time. 
This is caused mainly by rapid population growth and the increasing population’s 
needs for forest resources such as wood and land. Many people in the country 
use wood for cooking, heating, and lightning, as well as for houses and furniture. 
Similarly, the increasing demand for agricultural and settlement lands is a major 
cause of forest destruction in the country. In Ethiopia, there is a direct correlation 
between population density and deforestation – the more people there are in an 
area, the more trees they cut down. New trees do not spring up to replace the old 
ones. 
Deforestation refers to the removal of forest cover of an area without adequate 
replacement. In other words, it is the process of the indiscriminate destruction 
of the natural vegetation cover of a forest area.
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 193
4.7 Impacts Of Rapid Population Growth In Ethiopia 4.7 Impacts Of Rapid Population Growth In Ethiopia
Focus
In Ethiopia, rapid population growth leads to deforestation mainly because 
of peoples’ increasing needs for more:
F wood
F agricultural land
F settlement land
F grazing land
Such deforestation has various negative consequences, both directly on the natural 
environment, and indirectly on the socio-economic conditions of the people. Its 
direct consequences include the following.
F It accelerates soil erosion.
F It destroys biodiversity.
F It affects rainfall by decreasing evapotranspiration.
F It results in shortages of wood supply.
F It affects the natural beauty of the affected areas.
Activity 4.22
In pairs, discuss this question. 
What are the indirect consequences of deforestation on socio-economic conditions?
4.7.2 Pollution
Can you mention some of the causes of air and water pollution? Is pollution a 
problem in your locality?
Water and air pollution are mainly caused by human activities in households, 
industries, farmlands, means of transportation, and so on. However, it can also be 
Pollution refers to any undesirable change in natural conditions of water, 
air, and other components of the natural environment that has negative 
effects on the health and activities of human beings and other living 
creatures.
Grade 12 Geography 194
4.7 Impacts Of Rapid Population Growth In Ethiopia
caused by natural events such as volcanic eruption, wildfire, and the like.
When an area is overcrowded (i.e. inhabited by a rapidly growing number of 
people) the natural environment is polluted by a variety of unwanted and 
harmful wastes that peoples’ activities produce. In Ethiopia, pollution is a major 
problem in overpopulated urban centers. In large cities like Addis Ababa, most 
people live in unsafe environments that have extremely polluted air and water. 
They are surrounded by the garbage and pollutants that households, industries, 
automobiles, and other sources discharge. 
Focus
In Ethiopia, rapid population growth leads to environmental pollution by 
increasing emission of the amounts of pollutants such as:
F Sewage, solid wastes, and pollutant gases generated by households.
F Pollutant gases, liquids, and solid chemicals generated by expanded 
industries.
F Pollutant gases generated by the increasing number of automobiles.
F Agricultural pollutants, such as fertilizers, pesticides, animal wastes, 
etc.
Activity 4.23
Group Project
1 Form a small group with the help of your teacher.
2 Your teacher will assign one of the following topics to each group.
F Impact of rapid population growth in Ethiopia on:
K Housing
K Food supply
K Farmland
K Education
K Health care
K Drought and famine
3 Write a short paper on the issue.
4 Choose a group representative to present your paper to the class for further 
discussion.
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 195
4.7 Impacts Of Rapid Population Growth In Ethiopia 4.8 Population Policy Of Ethiopia
4.8 POPULATION POLICY OF ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ adhere to the realization of population policy of Ethiopia.
Key Terms
³ Policy 
³ Population policy 
³ Anti-natal policy 
³ Pro-natal policy 
³ Reproductive health 
³ Family planning 
Why do governments and organizations, especially in developing countries like 
Ethiopia, strongly encourage population planning? 
Focus
F A population policy is a policy that is formulated and implemented 
by a government in order to plan and control population growth, 
based on the economic, social, cultural, political, and demographic 
conditions of the country. It is needed mainly to address populationrelated problems in a country. 
F The population policies of countries can be broadly categorized into 
two groups as: anti-natalist and pro-natalist policies.
K Anti-natalist population policy seeks to lower fertility rates, in 
particular, and population growth rates, in general.
K Pro-natalist population policy seeks to increase fertility rates, 
in particular, and population growth rates, in general. 
History of Population Policy in Ethiopia
In Ethiopia, population policies were given low priority before the early 1990s. 
After the Derg regime, the Transitional Government of Ethiopia (TGE) adopted 
a national population policy in 1993. The policy was based on the awareness that 
large population size and continued rapid population growth in Ethiopia can be 
an enemy of development and can cause economic, social and environmental 
problems in the country. 
Grade 12 Geography 196
4.8 Population Policy Of Ethiopia
Activity 4.24
In pairs, discuss the following questions.
F Which of the two types of population policies is appropriate for addressing 
population-related problems in Ethiopia and in other similarly developing 
countries of the world? Explain why.
F What kinds of countries use pro-natalist population policies? Explain why.
Goals and Strategies of Ethiopia’s Population Policy
Ethiopia’s anti-natal population policy formulates several goals and strategies to 
regulate population for the over all good of the country.
Ethiopia’s Population-Policy Goals
Ethiopia’s population policy has the following types of goals:
F Broad F General F Specific 
The broad goal of Ethiopia’s population policy is to promote social welfare 
by harmonizing the rate of population growth and the country’s capacity for 
socio-economic development and the rational utilization of natural resources. 
The policy expresses particular concern over the age structure of Ethiopia’s 
population, which is greatly dominated by young people. The policy is also 
concerned with the large number of women in childbearing age, which is likely 
to result in continued rapid population growth.
General objectives of Ethiopia’s population policy include:
F Closing the gap between high population growth and low economic 
productivity, through planned reduction of population growth and 
increasing economic returns;
Note
Similar to most of the developing countries, the type of 
population policy used in Ethiopia is basically anti-natalist. 
Such policies promote lowered fertility rates, in particular, and 
lowered population growth rates, in general. 
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 197
4.8 Population Policy Of Ethiopia 4.8 Population Policy Of Ethiopia
F Expediting socio-economic development processes through holistically 
integrated development programs;
F Reducing the rate of rural-to-urban migration;
F Ensuring environmental protections;
F Reducing morbidity and mortality;
F Raising the economic and social status of women; and
F Improving the social and economic status of vulnerable groups, such as 
adolescents, children, and the elderly.
Specific objectives of Ethiopia’s population policy include:
F Reducing the total fertility rate (TFR) of 7.7 children per woman in 
1990 to 4.0 by the year 2015;
F Increasing the prevalence of contraceptive use from 4.0 percent in 1990 
to 44 percent in 2015;
F Reducing maternal, infant, and child morbidity and mortality rates, as 
well as promoting the level of general welfare of the population;
F Significantly increasing female participation at all levels of the 
educational system;
F Removing all legal and customary practices that prevent women from 
the full enjoyment of economic and social rights, including the full 
enjoyment of property rights and access to gainful employment;
F Ensuring spatially balanced population distribution patterns, with a 
view to maintaining environmental security and extending the scope of 
development activities;
F Improving productivity in agricultural activities and introducing offfarm and non-agricultural activities for the purpose of employment 
diversification; and
F Mounting effective country-wide population information and program 
s that address issues pertaining to small family size and its relationship 
to human welfare and environmental security. 
Ethiopia’s Population-Policy Strategies
The strategies by which the goals and objectives of the population policy are to 
be attained include the following.
F Expanding contraceptive distribution;
Grade 12 Geography 198
4.8 Population Policy Of Ethiopia
F Diversifying available contraceptive methods;
F Raising the minimum age of marriage for girls from 15 years to at least 
18 years;
F Promoting breast-feeding as a means of birth-spacing; 
F Implementing career counseling services in schools;
F Integrating women into the modern sector of the economy;
F Amending all laws “impeding, in any way, the access of women to all 
social, economic, and cultural resources”;
F Amending relevant articles and sections of the civil code to remove 
unnecessary restrictions to “advertisement, propagation and 
popularization of diverse contraceptive methods”;
F Establishing teenage and youth reproductive health counseling centers;
F Increasing research in reproductive health; and
F Promoting the involvement of males in family planning. 
The population policy of Ethiopia acknowledges that existing reproductive health 
service delivery systems are limited in scope and that choice of family planning 
methods is limited. To correct these problems, it calls for an expansion of 
reproductive health service delivery, currently available only through the limited 
formal health structure, to clinical and community-based outreach services. It 
also recommends the involvement of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) 
in providing reproductive health services, including the widest possible choice 
of contraceptives.
The policy also acknowledges a need to expand capacity for performing population 
research and training family planning advisors. To implement these, it calls for 
family planning to be integrated into the curricula of medical schools, nursing 
and health assistants’ schools, junior colleges, and technical-vocational schools.
The population policy also calls for the expansion of Information, Education, and 
Communication (IEC), and community involvement in achieving the goals and 
objectives of the policy.
In general, the population policy covers all major ground that needs to be covered 
in providing directives on the management of population growth in the interest of 
sustainable development.
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 199
4.8 Population Policy Of Ethiopia 4.9 Urbanization In Ethiopia
Activity 4.25
Write a short essay on the following question.
What are your responsibilities and roles in the realization of Ethiopia’s population 
policy?
4.9 URBANIZATION IN ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ explain the concept of urbanization; and
Þ discuss the rate of urbanization and its regional variation in Ethiopia
Þ compare rate of urbanization.
4.9.1 The Concept of Urbanization
What do you know about the concept of urbanization, its causes, and 
consequences?
The degree of urbanization varies throughout the world but generally reflects the 
wealth of individual countries. The rich, industrialized countries tend to be the 
most highly urbanized, while the poor countries tend to be the least urbanized. In 
the Netherlands, for example, 89 percent of the population is urban, compared to 
only 16 percent in Ethiopia. 
In most developing countries, including Ethiopia, most rural migrantsto the cities 
have bettered themselves in comparison to their former standard of living in rural 
areas. However, the rapid growth of population in urban centers of such countries 
has been causing serious problems such as overcrowding, substandard housing, 
homelessness, inadequate municipal services, crime, poverty, and pollution. 
Urbanization is the process of population shifts from rural areas to cities, 
and the resulting growth of urban areas. It is the process whereby large 
numbers of people leave countryside/rural places and small towns in order 
to settle in cities and surrounding metropolitan/urban areas. A nation is 
said to have become more urbanized as its cities grow in number, its urban 
populations increase in size, and the proportion of its population living in 
urban areas rises.
Grade 12 Geography 200
4.9 Urbanization In Ethiopia
Today, these characteristics mark the lives of many people in most urban centers 
of the developing countries. Dealing with these conditions, especially in very 
large cities like Addis Ababa, presents massive difficulties for governments.
4.9.2 Trends of Urbanization in Ethiopia
What factors are responsible for the varying trends of urbanization in Ethiopia? 
As been pointed out earlier, urbanization is a recent phenomenon in Ethiopia. 
It was introduced mainly after the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Factors 
Contributing to Urbanization in the nation include: firstly, peoples’ need for 
better living conditions this has been the major cause for the origin, growth and 
development of many of the urban centers; secondly, people’s desire to come 
close to clustered settlements, many rural Ethiopians have been motivated to 
move and settle in urban places where there are relatively higher concentration 
of social services, industries, and employment opportunities.
Focus
In the history of Ethiopia, major factors contributed to the origin and 
development of most urban centers
F The interconnection of the different parts of the country by allweather roads, which radiate from Addis Ababa. 
F The five-year Italian occupation, which intensified the construction 
of roads, and the development of small-scale industries and servicegiving institutions.
Most urban centers of Ethiopia have developed along major transport routes, 
which have attracted people to these areas. Consequently, areas with greater 
transport route network have larger numbers of urban settlements, and higher 
population densities. 
Two main areas have relatively large concentrations of urban centers and urban 
population: the Shewan and the Harerghe plateaus. Together, these regions 
account for more than 50 percent of the urban population of the country. The 
major reasons for this situation are:
F Concentration of industries that results in relatively higher opportunities 
for employment.
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 201
4.9 Urbanization In Ethiopia 4.9 Urbanization In Ethiopia
F Concentrations of social services and facilities, such as schools, health 
institutions, water supplies, electricity, transportation, etc that result in, 
relatively, better living conditions.
Levels and Distribution of Urbanization in Ethiopia
In spite of the high rate of rural-urban migration in Ethiopia, the level of 
urbanization has been very low in the country. Less than 3 percent of Ethiopia’s 
population lived in urban areas in the 1940s. This figure increased to about 8.5 
percent in 1967 and then to 9.7 percent in 1970. The three censuses of the country 
indicate that the percentage of urban population was 10.6 percent in 1984, 13.7 
percent in 1994, and 16.1 percent in 2007. 
Although these figures show that urbanization is increasing in Ethiopia, their 
absolute values also indicate that the country’s urbanization is low, and that its 
urban population is one of the smallest in the world. This indicator reflects the 
country’s status as a very undeveloped nation.
Source: OPHCC (1991), CSA, (1984, 1994, 2007 Censuses)
The other aspect of urbanization in Ethiopia is great variation in the distribution 
of urban populations illustrated in Figure 4.13. According to the 2007 Census, the 
urban population rate ranges from 10 percent in SNNP to 100 percent in Addis 
Ababa. Despite the fact that Addis Ababa City Administration is entirely urban, 
its percentage share of Ethiopia’s total urban population is only 23.1 percent. The 
largest share, about 28 percent, is living in Oromiya Region. In contrast, Gambela 
0 5 10 15 20
1940
1967
1970
1984
1994
2007
1940 1967 1970 1984 1994 2007
Urban Population (%) 3 8.5 9.7 10.6 13.7 16.1
Figure 4.12: Trends of Urbanization (Urban Population 
Growth) in Ethiopia
Grade 12 Geography 202
4.9 Urbanization In Ethiopia
region has the smallest share of the country’s urban population, although more 
than one-fourth of the region’s population lives in urban areas.
Source: CSA, 2007 Census
Activity 4.26
Refer to the preceding figure to answer the following questions.
1 What are the three least urbanized regions of Ethiopia?
2 Which three regions have the smallest urban populations, as compared to the 
urban population of Ethiopia as a whole? What are the reasons for the regional 
variation of urban population in Ethiopia?
0
10
20
30
7.12
1.56
17.81
27.97
5.25 0.89 
12.61
0.66 0.84 
23.09
2.00
% Urban from the Country’s Total Urban Population 
0
20
40
60
80
100
19.6 13.3 12.3 12.3 14.0 13.5 10.0
25.4
54.2
100
68.2
16.1
% Urban from the Regional Total Population
Figure 4.13: Regional Distribution of Urban 
Population in Ethiopia
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 203
4.9 Urbanization In Ethiopia Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY
Þ Malthusian population theory is very pessimistic about population growth 
and its effects, while the anti-Malthusian theories are optimistic.
Þ Ethiopia is the third most populous country in Africa, with a population of 
73.8 million. With a growth rate of 2.23, the country’s population is among 
the fastest growing in the world.
Þ In Ethiopia a high percentage of the national population is the young age 
group. This is the result of high birth rate. 
Þ In Ethiopia, the population is unevenly distributed; this is due to various 
physical and human-related factors. 
Þ Settlements in Ethiopia are broadly categorized as rural and urban. The 
primary bases for this distinction are the dominant economic activities and 
population density.
Þ Population change in any country is affected by three major factors. These 
factors are: fertility (births), mortality (deaths), and international migration
(movement into or out of country).
Þ Ethiopia is characterized by rapid population growth, resulting from a high 
level of fertility. However, fertility has been declining, moderately especially 
since the late 1980s.
Þ Although, in general, mortality rates have been declining in Ethiopia, as in 
most countries in sub-Saharan Africa, the country still has a high mortality 
rate.
Þ In Ethiopia, the number of international emigrants is higher than the number 
of immigrants. Within the country, there have been substantial internal 
movements of people. This has been due to various reasons, including 
economic, social, political and natural factors.
Þ In Ethiopia, rapid population growth has brought about serious negative 
impacts on the country’s socio-economic development and on its 
environmental protection.
Þ Similar to most of the developing countries, the type of population policy 
used in Ethiopia is basically anti-natalist, promoting lowered fertility rates, in 
particular, and lower population growth rates, in general.
Þ In Ethiopia, urbanization is a recent phenomenon introduced mainly after 
the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The country is categorized as one of 
the least urbanized countries of the world. In Ethiopia, the proportion of 
urban population varies greatly by region.
Grade 12 Geography 204
Unit Review
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 4
I Answer TRUE or FALSE.
1 The main reason for the broad base of Ethiopia’s population pyramid is 
high rate of mortality in the country.
2 Malthusian population theory believes that population growth has positive 
consequences.
3 Since 1990, the TFR of Ethiopia’s population has been declining.
4 The high age dependency ratio in Ethiopia is the result of large numbers of 
people in the old-age group.
5 In Ethiopia, altitude is the major factor that influences population 
distribution.
II Choose the best possible answer from the alternatives provided.
6 Which of the following areas is in the most sparsely populated areas of 
Ethiopia?
A Kembata
B Sidama
C Borena
D Hadiya
E B and D
7 Which one of the following indicators measures the total number of births 
occurring in a given year, per 1000 population?
A Total Fertility Rate
B Crude Birth Rate
C General Fertility Rate
D Age Specific Fertility Rate
E Rate of Natural Increase
8 In Ethiopia, socio-economic conditions affect all of the following, except:
A Urbanization
B Migration
C Age structure
D Population density
E None of the above
9 The high rate of maternal mortality in Ethiopia is the result of:
A High educational status of women.
B High frequency of births per woman.
C Low access of women to reproductive health services.
D Early marriage
E All except “A”
Unit 4: POPULATION OF ETHIOPIA AND THE HORN 205
Unit Review
10 Which one of the following is a push factor for the migration of many 
people from rural areas to urban areas in Ethiopia?
A Poor employment
B Better job prospects
C Better services and facilities
D Improved housing
E Improved living conditions
III Match the items given under Column A with those under 
Column B.
A B
IV Fill in the blank spaces.
16 The process of the shift of population from rural areas to cities, and the 
resulting growth of urban areas is _____________ .
17 Any death that occurs during pregnancy, child birth, or within two months 
after the birth or termination of a pregnancy is defined as ___________ .
18 According to the 2007 Census, the TFR of Ethiopia’s population is about 
__________.
19 In the pastoralist areas of Ethiopia, population densities are __________.
20 The Ethiopian region that has the highest proportion of the nation’s 
population is __________.
V Answer the following questions briefly in writing.
21 What are the two reasons for the high fertility rates in Ethiopia?
22 Why are the lowland areas of Ethiopia sparsely populated?
23 Why is the age dependency ratio of Ethiopia’s population very high?
24 What are the major goals of Ethiopia’s population policy?