As documents reveal, Ethiopia’s economy is dominantly based on agriculture: 85 
percent of the population is engaged in this sector. However, the performance of 
this sector had been weak until 1992. As the Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development study (2004) on sources of growth revealed, encouraging progress 
had been made in recent years in improving some of the basic aspects of life 
across many parts of the country.
However, the Ethiopian government states that, for the last six or seven years, 
the country’s overall economy has been growing at the rate of 11% per year. This 
growth rate is among the highest in the world. 
While studying this unit, you will learn about the status of the Ethiopian economy 
and its prospects. As part of your work, be sure to expand your knowledge by 
investigating different sources of information, including books, newspapers, 
radio and television. 
In your Grade 10 geography lessons you studied various economic subjects, 
including detailed analyses of Ethiopia’s economic sectors. The current unit 
continues to consider this subject matter, while focusing on the major features of 
the Ethiopian economy. 
The unit begins by discussing the concepts of economic growth and economic
development. More than forty indicators are used to assess the economic 
development of countries. Here, a few that are relevant to the Ethiopian situation 
are outlined. The challenges to and prospects for Ethiopia’s socio-economic 
development are also discussed. Ethiopia’s economic relations with neighboring 
and other countries are also described. Finally, we present the objectives of 
Ethiopia’s 2005-2010 Plan for Accelerated and Sustainable Development to End 
Poverty (PASDEP).
Grade 12 Geography 208
5.1 An Overview Of Growth And Development Trend In Ethiopia
5.1 AN OVERVIEW OF GROWTH AND 
DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ discuss trends of economic growth and development in Ethiopia.
Key Terms
³ Economic growth 
³ Economic development
³ Linkages between sectors
³ Indicators of development
³ Accelerated development
³ Sustained development
³ Poverty trap
³ Duty-free
³ Quota-free
Start-Up Activity
Answer the following questions.
What do you understand by the term economic growth? Does it mean the same thing 
as economic development? Or are they different?
Economic growth and development are not the same. They have two different 
meanings. Growth is the quantitative accumulation of the national capital. It is 
simply a change in output regardless of cultural, political, economic and other 
improvements. 
Development is far more complex than growth. Development is a process 
involving economic as well as social and environmental changes. It involves 
higher per capita income, equitable education, and job opportunities, greater 
gender equality, better health and nutrition, cleaner, more sustainable natural 
environment, a more impartial judicial and legal system, broader civil and 
political freedoms, and richer cultural life.
Development is also the qualitative transformation of a whole society, a shift 
to new ways of thinking, and corresponding new relations and new methods of 
production. Moreover, transformation only qualifies as development if it benefits 
most people – improves their quality of life and gives them more control over 
their destinies. This comprehensive process of change has to involve most of the 
population and cannot be limited to modernization at the top or in the capital city.
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 209
5.1 An Overview Of Growth And Development Trend In Ethiopia 5.1 An Overview Of Growth And Development Trend In Ethiopia
Development must be inclusive of future generations and the earth they will 
inherit. According to the UN Commission on Environment and Development 
(1987) “sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the 
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs”. It must engage in people, for without their participation, no strategy can 
succeed for long. 
The term trend refers to a general tendency, movement or direction. So, in the 
economy of a country, the trend may be upward, downward or stagnating. 
Activity 5.1
Form two or more groups (depending on the class size and access to the desired 
information) and share tasks. Let a certain group search information/data from the 
local concerned offices and another group reconcile the achievement made in the 
surroundings. Finally report to the class and make discussion. 
According to official sources, the economy of Ethiopia shows a forward tendency 
with a growing rate of 11% per annum and is projected has been growing at a rate 
of 11% and is projected to increase in the coming 5 years. 
When we refer to our topic, Economic Growth and Development Trend in 
Ethiopia, there has been an encouraging trend since 1996. This fact has been 
released by Welfare Monitoring surveys as follows. 
F In rural areas, the literacy rate increased from 18% in 1995/96 to 31% 
in 2004/05. 
F At country level, gross enrollment ratio at primary grades level has 
increased from 37.4% in 1996 to 79.8 in 2004/05. Although still 
relatively high, primary dropouts in rural areas declined from 18.5% 
in 1996 to 13.6% in 2004 at secondary level from 29.3% to 16.5%. The 
proportion of households that are very far away from schools. i.e., 10 
km in the case of primary school) has fallen substantially. 
F The proportion of rural population living more than 20 km from a health 
facility has fallen from 20% of household, in 1996 to 13% in 2004. 
Grade 12 Geography 210
5.2 An Overview Of Growth And Development Trend In Ethiopia
F A consistent decline in malnutrition over time is being shown in both 
rural and urban area. The rate in urban areas fell from 58% in 1996 to 
30% in 2004; and in rural areas fell from 67% to 48%. 
F About 92% of rural households are less than 5 kms away from the 
closest source of drinking water while it is much better in urban area. 
More than 82% could get access to drinking water in less than onekilometer distance. 
F About 42% of rural households are now less than five kilometers away 
from the closest all-weather road. The trend over time also indicates 
that availability of all-weather roads within five kilometer radius has 
been increasing etc. 
In general, Ethiopia has started to have an economic growth at an average 11%, 
which is appreciable. PASDEP has contributed much to enhance all the achievements 
made for the last five years, the new Growth and Transformation Program (2010-
15) will promote and lead to increased success within the coming five years. 
Activity 5.2
Perform the following tasks:
1 Using an atlas, locate the continents that are considered developed and those 
considered to be developing.
2 List at least five countries from each of the above two groups.
 Exercise 5.1
Short answer questions.
1 Give examples that express economic growth.
2 Describe aspects that explain or show economic development for one 
country that has experienced it, and then for another country that has not.
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 211
5.2 An Overview Of Growth And Development Trend In Ethiopia 5.2 Major Features Of Ethiopian Economy
5.2 MAJOR FEATURES OF ETHIOPIAN 
ECONOMY
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ characterize the major features of the Ethiopian economy; and 
Þ describe links between different economic sectors of Ethiopia.
Key Terms
³ Cash crops 
³ Industrial crops
³ GDP
³ GNP
³ Backward-linkage
³ Foreward-linkage
How can you characterize the main features of Ethiopian economy? 
The nature, performance, and growth of each sector were discussed in detail. 
Here in this unit, only their basic features are given as we examine the main 
characteristics of Ethiopia’s economy. Try to integrate the information between 
the two units. 
This section highlights the major sectors of the Ethiopian economy: 
F agricultural 
F industrial 
F distributed (service)
The agricultural sector, which is the dominant sector in many aspects, has 
performed unsatisfactorily for the last forty or fifty years due to multifaceted 
determining factors. Although various developmental strategies have been 
adopted since the early 1960s, their performance has been low. Even in the fiscal 
years of and 2002/03, 2003/04, 2004/05, 2005/06, 2006/07, 2007/08, the GDP 
share of agriculture was 44.9%, 47%, 47.4%, 47.2%, 46.3%, 44.6%, respectively. 
This apparent decline was due to problems of weather changes, is the main factor 
on which Ethiopian agriculture depends. However, reforms instituted after 2002 
have promoted the sector significantly. 
Grade 12 Geography 212
5.2 Major Features Of Ethiopian Economy
Table 5.1: Sector share in GDP 
 Fiscal year Sector Share in GDP (%)
2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10
Agriculture and allied activities 47.0 46.0 44.6 43 42
Industry 13.0 13.0 13.0 13 13
Service/distributive sector 40 41.0 43.4 45 46
GDP 100 100 100 101 101
Source: Ethiopia APRM Report
Agriculture’s main products are food crops, cash crops, industrial crops, fruits 
and vegetables, flowers, and animal products. 
Agriculture had been the leading sector followed by the service sector until 
2007/08. But, after 2008/09, the service sector emerged as the dominate/leading 
sector mainly due to the natural factors and economic factors. One of the lower 
capital and space required at the initial period. 
Table 5.2: Service sub-sector growth performance 
Sub-sectors
Growth Performance 
2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10
Trade, hotels and restaurants 27.5 23.3 23.9 24.1
Transport and communication 9.3 11.5 8.9 13.8
Banking and insurance 15.1 28.1 16.5 13.7
Public administration and finance 11.8 12.5 18.4 3.4
Education 21.2 14.8 13.0 17.0
Health 15.8 15.5 19.3 8.3
Source: MOFED 
Among the various service sub-sectors, trade, hotels and restaurants had 
remarkable overall growth spanning the years shown in Table 5.2. Banking and 
insurance follows showing an average growth rate performance of 18.5 percent 
from 2006/07 through 2009/10. Education ranks third with an average growth 
rate of 16.5 percent.
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 213
5.2 Major Features Of Ethiopian Economy 5.2 Major Features Of Ethiopian Economy
The industrial sector ranked third in its contribution to Ethiopia’s GDP. Its growth 
was small (13.0%) in comparison to that of the agriculture and service sectors. 
This could be attributed to the short history of industrialization in the country. Its 
growth has been modest, not exceeding 7 percent for the last four decades, except 
during the years 1997/98 to 2009/10. 
The industrial sector consists mainly of large and medium-size industries, smallscale and handicraft manufacturing, and the construction sub-sector.
Table 5.3: Growth performance of the industrial sub-sectors 
Sector/Sub-sector
Growth performance (%)
2001/02
2007/08
2008/09
2009/10
Industry (total) 8.3 10.1 9.7 10.6
Mining and Quarrying 10.5 21.4 12.8 44.2
Large-scale and medium-scale 
industries 0.2 12.6 10.3 11.4
Small-scale and handicraft 
industries
3.2 5.6 6.4 66
Electricity and water 9.7 4.8 5.0 5.1
Construction 16.2 11.3 11.7 10.9
Source: MOFED (2010)
The industrial sector employs about 10 percent of the country’s active labor force. 
The main products include textiles, food stuffs, beverages, cement, leather and 
leather products, metallic and non-metallic products, wood, and paper and pulp. 
Among the industrial sub-sectors, mining and quarrying has shown a tremendous 
growth performance accounting 44.2 percent of the industrial sector’s growth 
performance. It is followed by large and medium-size manufacturing’s and 
construction. 
Regarding the links between the various economic sectors, the forward 
and backward linkages between agriculture and industry have not been very 
strong. However, recent development programs launched in 2002 and later 
have practiced the country’s industrialization process should rely. This is why 
Grade 12 Geography 214
5.2 Major Features Of Ethiopian Economy
the current government adopted the developmental strategy called Agricultural 
Development-Led Industrialization (ADLI). 
ADLI’s top-level goals are to ensure: 
F economic growth through a rural-center development strategy
F improved living standards for rural and urban dwellers
F effective education services 
F expansion of preventive and primary health care facilities
Table 5.4 shows the growth performance of all of Ethiopia’s economic sectors 
from 2000/01 through 2009/10. The service sector had the greatest growth, 
followed by agriculture.
Table 5.4: Growth performance, by sector (%) 
 Fiscal years 
Sector 2000/01 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10
Agriculture and allied activities 1.9 7.5 6.4 7.9
Industry 8.3 10.1 9.7 10.6
Service sector 3.3 16.0 14.0 13.0
Total GDP 1.3 11.4 10.1 10.4
Source: MOFED 
Activity 5.3
In your geography workgroup, perform the following activities: 
1 Assess the performances and roles of each economic activity performed in 
your area. 
2 Define and describe your locality’s economic sectors. 
3 Classify each economic activity as belonging to one of the major sectors. 
4 Discuss whether and how the sectors are linked. If you decide that any are 
unlinked, attempt to discover the reasons. 
5 You can present your ideas or opinions through your elected representative. 
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 215
5.2 Major Features Of Ethiopian Economy 5.3 Present Features Of Ethiopian Socio-economic Development
 Exercise 5.2
1 List the economic sectors of Ethiopia by rank depending on their 
contribution to the country’s GDP.
2 List the industrial sub-section by rank, depending on their growth 
performance from 1999-2005.
3 Suggest why industrialization has a relatively lower status in its contribution 
to Ethiopias’s GDP.
4 Suggest the possible ways to promote industrialization in Ethiopia.
5.3 PRESENT FEATURES OF ETHIOPIAN 
SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
After completing this section, you will be able to:
Þ reflect links between different economic sectors of Ethiopia;
Þ generalize the present features of Ethiopian socio-economic development; 
and
Þ analyze indicators of development in the Ethiopian context.
Key Terms
³ Expected life expectancy
³ Sustainable development
³ PRP
³ Range areas/lands
³ Spacing of births
What does the present socio-economic feature of Ethiopia look like? 
There are various indicators of development employed to compare the level of 
development countries or regions. The following are widely/frequently used in 
the Ethiopian context. 
F GDP or GNP (Gross Domestic Product/Gross National Product) per 
capita. 
F Illiteracy rate 
F Infant mortality rate 
F Expected life expectancy 
Grade 12 Geography 216
5.3 Present Features Of Ethiopian Socio-economic Development
F Population growth rate 
F Percentage of population who have access to clean water 
F Level of infrastructural development, etc. 
Based on the above indicators, Ethiopia’s present socio-economic features are 
treated as follows. 
1 GDP per capita: It is believed that Ethiopia’s GDP per capita is one of 
the lowest in the world. PASDEP’s target has achieved a growth rate of 
Ethiopia’s GDP per capita status will join the middle in group countries 
with in the coming five years (2010-2015). The current status of Ethiopia’s 
GDP per capita is estimated to be US $344 per annum (source: wikipedia, 
the free encyclopedia). 
2 Literacy rate: Like many of the less developed countries, the illiteracy 
rate in Ethiopia has been high. The literacy campaign that had under taken 
before 1991 contributed much to the ongoing task to eradicate illiteracy. 
Since 1996, the illiteracy rate has decreased by 50%. Welfare Monitoring 
Surveys Undertaken so far exhibits a sharp rise in gross school enrollment 
that considerably confirm the decline of illiteracy rate in the country. 
The current literacy rate of Ethiopia is said to be 42.7% in the year 2009 
(Source: wikipedia, the free encyclopedia). 
3 Infant Mortality Rate: Like in many developing countries, IMR in 
Ethiopia has been high. The UNDP 1997 census reveal that Ethiopia’s 
infant mortality rate was 111/000 which even above the average of subsharan countries (97/1000). The recent development strategies adopted to 
achieve growth and sustained development, has target to lower down the 
IMR to 47/1000 with in the coming five years. 
4 Expected life expectancy: the life expectancy of any country is the 
reflection of varied social, economic, psychological and other factors. 
In most developing countries life expectancy does not exceed 55 years. 
Likewise, in Ethiopia, it was 43 about ten years ago due to the prevalence 
of HIV impacts. The recent strategies adopted both in the primary health 
care services and supply of HIV/AIDS medicines extensively, the expected 
life expectancy in Ethiopia has reached to 55.8 years in 2009/10. 
5 Population growth rate: Rapid population growth with an average rate per 
annum has been one of the many threats to Ethiopia’s development pace. 
Estimates or surveys reveal that 38,000 people are added to the population 
each week incurring high costs of providing additional services. Addressing 
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 217
5.3 Present Features Of Ethiopian Socio-economic Development 5.3 Present Features Of Ethiopian Socio-economic Development
this issue GTP the continuation of PASDEP has designed to slow the rapid 
population growth by applying spacing of births through health service 
institutions and extension package services 
6 Percentage of population with access to clean water: for many decades 
lack of access to clean water has been our peoples serious problem. Most 
illness caused both in urban and rural areas are related to unsafe water. 
7 Based on the surveys made by a welfare monitoring organization, a greater 
proportion of rural population had been very far away from sources of 
drinkable water. Mothers and daughters were travelling long distances to 
fetch for water. By this; 32% of rural people get their water from unclean 
rivers and lakes and about 42% from unprotected well or spring. Only 14% 
used a protected water/well and 10% had access to a public tap water. In 
the last ten years, the establishment and rehabilitation of water supplies in 
rural and urban areas have been changing the picture. 
8 Level of infrastructural development: This indicator of development 
includes a vaguely of elements that promote the living standard of people. 
In our context; we here by examine the road networks, electric power 
supply, rehabilitation/ resettlement of pastoralists, access to health services 
and strengthen the urban-rural link. 
In the last ten years under PRP (Poverty Reduction Programme), SDPRP 
(Sustainable Development for Poverty Reduction Programme) and PASDEP 
(Plan of Action for Sustained Development to End Poverty), significant measures 
have been made to change the picture and attain the millennium development 
goals. This is expressible by the: 
F Expansion of the road network with a target of constructing almost 
20,000 kms of new road by 2010 (90% them in rural areas) 
F Expansion of construction works for 514 towns and rehabhitation 
works for 228 towns to improve the living condition for the urban poor. 
F Access to health services improving. The proportion of population 
living more than 20 km from a health facility has fallen from 20% of 
households in 1996 to 13% in 2000. Over half the rural population is 
now less than 10 km from either a health post or clinic. 
F Electricity use is concentrated almost entirely in urban area. According 
to surveys, 989 percent of rural households and 24 percent of urban 
households do not use electricity. This situation has changed by 
reducing the problem by 17% in the year 2004/05. The target is to lower 
the problem by 50% in the year 2009/10. 
Grade 12 Geography 218
5.4 Challenges And Prospects Of Socio-economic Development For Ethiopia
F A special effort is under way to change the lives of the pastoralists 
who depend on grazing herds of cattle, camels and goats. These people 
are concentrated mostly in the dry lowland areas of Afar and Somali 
regions. In education, a network of informal community-based schools 
and teaching arrangements are being made. Special programs with 
improved veterinary services, marketing and early warning systems are 
under process. Water points adjacent to range areas for dry season 
utilization and small scale irrigation projects are underway. 
Activity 5.4
Organize a data or information collecting group. Let the group list the various 
infrastructural projects accomplished in your area. Attempt to describe how much 
these projects will help to change the living condition of the people. The group has to 
report to the class. The class has to discuss and comment on the report. 
 Exercise 5.3
1 What is the basic difference between GDP and GNP?
2 Explain the relationship between life expectancy on one hand and different 
socio-economic factors on the other hand.
3 Identify the current strategic measures underway to improve the pastoralists.
5.4 CHALLENGES AND PROSPECTS OF 
SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOR 
ETHIOPIA 
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Þ state the challenges to and prospects for Ethiopia’s socio-economic 
development. 
Key Terms
³ Poverty
³ Poverty-trap
³ Poverty-line
³ Land-fragmentation
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 219
5.4 Challenges And Prospects Of Socio-economic Development For Ethiopia 5.4 Challenges And Prospects Of Socio-economic Development For Ethiopia
The preceding section defined and distinguished between economic growth and 
development. Can you think of some of the economic developments achieved in 
your area? 
The ultimate goal of all economic planning and execution is growth followed 
by development. Achieving economic development has been a serious issue in 
many countries, especially in the developing countries. Different programs and 
strategies have been adopted and pursued, but often their goals have not been 
achieved or else have not been sustained. This has been the case in our country 
since the early 1960s. 
5.4.1 Challenges to Ethiopia’s SocioEconomic Development
What are Ethiopia’s challenges to achieve development? 
For about half a century, successive Ethiopian governments have launched 
economic development programs to reduce, if not to end, poverty. However, 
income poverty is widespread. Some 31 million people live below the poverty 
line, and between 6 and 13 million people are at risk of starvation every year. 
Also many people lack consumption access – which means that they are unable 
to purchase basic necessities, often for extended periods of time. 
Despite improvements in the past few years, sustainable long-term growth 
remains a challenge. For example, the full potential of the most basic sector - 
agriculture - has not yet been realized. Our overall growth performance has not 
yielded the hoped-for reduction in poverty. 
The different factors hindering Ethiopia’s progress (challenges) are interconnected 
and in combination constitute a “poverty trap” that prevents the country from 
breaking out of poverty. These factors are: 
F Rapid population growth and the concomitant addition of 2 million 
persons per year is a major barrier to poverty reduction. For instance, 
this growth puts tremendous strains on Ethiopia’s resource base and the 
government’s ability to deliver services. 
F Land-fragmentation: more than 50% of Ethiopia’s small land holders 
have less than 2 hectares, which deters the use of modern agricultural 
input and large-scale farming techniques. 
Grade 12 Geography 220
5.4 Challenges And Prospects Of Socio-economic Development For Ethiopia
F Environmental degradation has caused frequent droughts. 
F Very low productivity 
F Low income 
F Low levels of investment 
F Dependence on unreliable rainfall 
F Structural bottlenecks 
F Lack of good governance and commitment to accomplishing tasks
F Low infrastructure coverage: although there have been significant 
improvements during the past 10 years, the level of infrastructure 
coverage remains remarkably low when compared to elsewhere in the 
world, as shown in the Table 5.5.
Table 5.5: Distribution of main indicators of infrastructure availability 
Access to 
improved 
water (% of 
population)
Road 
density, 1999 
(km/1000 
people) 
Electrical 
power, 2001 
(kw percapita) 
Telephone 
lines, 2002 
(per 1,000 
persons) 
Ethiopia 24% 0.48 8 5
Average for 
Developing 
countries 
79% 0.14 272 100
Sub-Sahara 
Africa 58% 0.07 105 15
Low-income 
countries 76% 0.18 NA 28
5.4.2 Prospects for Ethiopia’s SocioEconomic Development 
What prospects for socio-economic development do you see for Ethiopia? 
There has been encouraging progress in recent years in improving some basic 
aspects of life in Ethiopia. Since 1996, the literacy rate has increased by 50%, the 
rate of malnutrition has fallen by 20%, the share of the population with access to 
clean water has risen to 38% and there has been a steady decline in the reported 
incidence of illness. Nonetheless, human development indicators in Ethiopia still 
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 221
5.4 Challenges And Prospects Of Socio-economic Development For Ethiopia 5.4 Challenges And Prospects Of Socio-economic Development For Ethiopia
remain at low levels compared with global indicators. For example, Ethiopia’s 
maternal mortality, is 673 per 100,000, in 2005/06, which is the highest in the 
world. 
The way to overcome these challenges is to sustain the economic growth achieved 
in the last few years. Maintaining the priority of such growth is essential to finally 
having a lasting impact on poverty. This growth process is also essential for 
financing the necessary social investment for human development. 
Estimates show that a growth rate of about 8% per annum would have to be 
sustained to reach the Millennium Development Goal (MDG). This rate would 
require a great deal of revenue. Existing revenues are insufficient for financing 
the proposed MDG growth in essential health, education, infrastructure and other 
services. Therefore, the government requires a massive increase in tax revenue 
(particularly from the unproductive consumption sector) to achieve the required 
economic growth of about 6 to 8% per year that is required for meeting the goals 
of the Growth and Transformation Programme (GTP) period (2010-2015). 
Furthermore, Ethiopia’s strategy must be based on its most abundant resources: 
labor and the country’s favorable climate (for instance for flowers and other 
crops). 
In sum, progress is needed on every possible front including: 
F proper utilization of agricultural potential; 
F much more rapid development of the modern sector; 
F exploitation of niche markets and opportunities wherever they present 
themselves; 
F expansion of exports: in particular, diversifying exportable items to 
widen the economic base, reduce susceptibility to shocks and, in the 
long term, to reduce the prevailing dependency on foreign aid; 
F promotion of better links between markets and producers to enable 
business to take place and to allow people easier access to essential 
services; 
F promotion of capacity building regarding the work force’s education 
and skills. 
Grade 12 Geography 222
5.5 Economic Relation
F slowing the existing rapid population growth; and 
F proper utilization of the potential of Ethiopia’s women, who constitute 
about 48.9 percent of the population. 
Activity 5.5
Make a thorough assessment of the challenges to economic growth and development 
in your area. What are the major challenges? For example, is it unemployment? Low 
productivity? Drought? What else? Then, predict the possible prospects for overcoming 
the challenges. If there are self-help institutions or associations in your area, discuss 
how they could be used. Also, invite guest speakers to conduct discussions with your 
class. 
 Exercise 5.4
1 State the domino-effects of rapid population growth.
2 What are the advantages of diversifying exportable items?
3 Explain briefly what capacity building mean to education.
4 How much growth rate is the estimate fore-warded to reach the Millennium 
Development Goals?
5.5 ECONOMIC RELATION
At the end of this section, you will be able to: 
Þ appreciate Ethiopia’s economic relations with other countries. 
Key Terms
³ Exports
³ Imports
³ Duty-free 
³ Quota-free
Why do countries establish economic relationships? Does any country in the 
world independently meet all the needs and wants of its nation? 
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 223
5.5 Economic Relation 5.5 Economic Relation
Many geographical and political factors drive countries to establish economic 
relationships with other countries, including: 
F geographic factors, such as physiographic variation, that result in 
product variation. 
F political factors such as political affiliations due to temporary or 
permanent common interests. 
F economic factors such as comparative advantages.
Ethiopia’s economic relationships are greatly affected by factors such as those. 
As a result, the nation has economic relationships with: 
F neighboring countries, 
F other countries.
5.5.1 Ethiopia’s Economic Relationships 
with Neighboring Countries 
Ethiopia has these relationships with its neighbors:
F Ethiopia has a long-standing economic relationship with the Republic 
of Djibouti. 
F The Sudan has started a good economic relationship with Ethiopia by 
providing petroleum. It is hoped that this relationship will strengthen in 
the future. 
F Due to the political instability prevailing in Somalia, economic 
relationships are minor.
5.5.2 Ethiopia’s Economic Relationships 
with Countries Other than its 
Neighbors 
The same factors that govern Ethiopia’s economic relationships with neighboring 
countries affect its relationships with other countries. In addition, the nature 
of Ethiopia’s export and import items as well as its trade policy and strategy 
influence the economic relationships that the nation establishes with distant 
countries. Another factor is Ethiopia’s advantageous geographical proximity to 
countries of the Middle East, the Gulf, and Europe. 
Grade 12 Geography 224
5.5 Economic Relation
Exports
For decades, Ethiopia has had substantial economic relationships with Western 
Europe, the Far East and North America. Due to the economic reforms of 1993 
and later periods, Ethiopian trade with these regions has grown, and its export 
destinations have widened to include other regions such as Central America . 
This expansion has led to greater earnings in foreign capital.
For instance, the relatively new business of exporting cut flowers has created a 
major export commodity and has opened new markets for Ethiopia and brought 
in significant foreign earnings. 
Regarding Ethiopia’s export distribution in world regions, Europe was the leading 
export destination in the year 2006/07, taking 40.8% of the total value, and was 
followed by Asia, Africa and North and Central America, accounting for 33.5%, 
15.5% and 5.8%, respectively. 
In terms of individual trade-partner countries, the export major destinations for 
2005 were:
F Germany 13.3% 
F China 9.1% 
F Japan 7.3% 
F Saudi Arabia 6% 
F Djibouti 5.9% 
F Italy 5% 
F USA 4.7% 
Germany was the single most important destination for Ethiopian exports between 
2004 and 2006. 
Imports
According to the Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ethiopia’s most important sources 
of imports in 2004/05 were the Middle East and Asia which, in combination, 
accounted for 57.5%. Next was Europe, at 23.1%. The third and fourth places 
were taken by North America and Africa. 
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 225
5.5 Economic Relation 5.5 Economic Relation
As for the individual trading partners, 
F Saudi Arabia’s share was 9.5% in 2003 and 15.7% in 2005. 
F China’s share was around 9.6% in 2003 and 12.7% in 2007. 
In general, Saudi Arabia and China are the two most important sources of imports 
for Ethiopia in recent years. The increase shown above in China’s share resulted 
when China became a major source of lower-cost consumer goods and other 
basic manufactured items.
Duty-Free and Quota-Free Market-Access 
Opportunities
In the context of the World Trade Organization (WTO), Ethiopia, which is one 
of the developing countries, is expected to benefit from duty-free and quota-free 
market-access opportunities. For example, the People’s Republic of China has 
granted almost all Ethiopian export products duty-free access to its markets. 
Such opportunities will broaden Ethiopia’s economic relationships and connect 
our nation with additional countries. This process will be facilitated by Ethiopia’s 
advantageous geographical proximities to the Middle East, Gulf countries and 
European countries. 
Activity 5.6
Considering the geographical advantages Ethiopia has over its neighboring countries, 
identify the most promising exportable items to the Middle East and Gulf countries. 
 Exercise 5.5
1 Which neighboring country of Ethiopia is a good trade partner? (In the 
sphere of recovering its exports).
2 Which European country takes the largest share of Ethiopians export?
3 States the most probable prospective trade regions or areas to Ethiopia’s 
agricultural exports.
Grade 12 Geography 226
5.6 Pasdep (plan For Accelerated And Sustained Development To End Poverty) 
5.6 PASDEP (PLAN FOR ACCELERATED AND 
SUSTAINED DEVELOPMENT TO END 
POVERTY)
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
Þ be interested in PASDEP. 
Key Terms
³ Growth and Transformation programme 
³ Massive push to accelerated growth
Does Ethiopia have a long history of adopting National Development plan? 
What are the core objectives of National Development plans? 
Since the early 1960s, various development plans have been designed in Ethiopia 
to alleviate poverty. However, due to factors such as wrong structural adjustments 
and frequent weather shocks, the country has not been able to come out of its 
“poverty trap”. 
The National Development Plans that were developed under the Monarchy and 
under the Military Regime were unable to improve the lives of most Ethiopian 
people, particularly the peasantry. 
The EPRDF government initiated a five-year development program during its 
first year’s rule (1992-1993). Later, it defined successive additional five-year 
development plans to achieve sustainable growth. These are 
F Sustainable Development and Poverty Reduction Programme (SDPRP) 
– 2000-2004. 
F Plan for Accelerated and Sustainable Developments to End Poverty – 
2005-2010 (PASDEP) 
F Growth and Transformation Programme – 2010-2015 (GTP). 
We shall now consider PASDEP, examining it as a good example of Ethiopia’s 
current approach to economic and social development. 
What is PASDEP?
PASDEP is a document that describes the Plan for Accelerated and Sustained 
Development to End Poverty. It was Ethiopia’s guiding strategic framework for 
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 227
5.6 Pasdep (plan For Accelerated And Sustained Development To End Poverty) 5.6 Pasdep (plan For Accelerated And Sustained Development To End Poverty) 
the five-year period of 2005 – 2010. It represents the second phase of SDPRP, 
which covered 2001 – 2004, and it is the link to GTP, which was designed for 
2010 – 2015. 
PASDEP carries forward important SDPRP strategies related to: 
F human development
F rural development
F food security
F capacity building 
GTP also addresses these and other socio-economic issues.
Unfortunately, during its 5-year period, PASDEP was affected by a number of 
external and internal shocks including: 
F less support than expected offered by donors
F poor rainfall 
F the global financial crises that began in 2008/2009 and swept the whole 
world
The PASDEP process benefited from two round consultations with civil society, 
non-government actors, and partners. The strategy was also supported by a 
number of background papers and studies prepared by government ministries and 
independent Ethiopian experts. The strategy’s bases included the MDGs Needs 
Assessment for Ethiopia. 
The PASDEP Strategy 
During the PASDEP period, Ethiopia continued to follow the important 
initiatives adopted under SDPRP (expanding education and strengthening health 
services, capacity building, decentralization, and the food security program). 
It also continued to pursue the strategy of ADLI (Agricultural DevelopmentLed Industrialization) but made important enhancements to intensify and 
commercialize the small-land-holding agricultural sub-sector. 
The PASDEP program was based on these nine activities: 
1 A massive push to accelerate growth. This strategy had two main thrusts: 
i Commercialization of agriculture, and 
ii Promoting much moral rapid non-farm private sector. 
2 A more differentiated approach to agriculture, focusing on Ethiopia’s very 
different agro-ecological area. 
Grade 12 Geography 228
5.6 Pasdep (plan For Accelerated And Sustained Development To End Poverty) 
3 A renewed look at several-urban linkages and the urban agenda. 
4 Addressing the population challenge by implementing the existing national 
population strategy and making services available for spacing births. 
5 Unleashing the potential of Ethiopia’s women. The goals were:
i increasing the number of girls who complete their schooling 
ii improving women’s health 
iii liberating girls’ and women’s time from the unproductive hours spent 
fetching water supplies. 
iv improving several telephone services
6 Strengthening the infrastructure’s backbone – the road network, water 
supply, electric power supply, etc. 
7 Managing risk and volatility. The goals were: 
i reducing repeated households cycles in and out of poverty that result 
from crop failure and major illness. 
ii reducing the impact of shocks on public finances and government 
programs
8 Intensive efforts to reach the MDGs. This goal included a major effort 
between the government of Ethiopia and its foreign-aid partners. 
9 Creating jobs. In Ethiopia, especially in urban areas, unemployment is a 
serious challenge. The goals were:
i managing the dynamics of population growth 
ii expanding labor-intensive production activities 
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 229
5.6 Pasdep (plan For Accelerated And Sustained Development To End Poverty) Unit Review
Unit Review
 UNIT SUMMARY 
Þ The two economic concepts – growth and development are not the same 
in scope and essence. 
Þ Economic development is more complex. In addition to the present socioeconomic situations, it considers the benefit of the future generation. 
Þ The major economic features of Ethiopia are characterized by the 
agriculture, industry and service sectors. The agricultural sector leads the 
other sectors in its contribution to GDP, export earnings, labour employment, 
etc. 
Þ Although the agricultural sector has relatively better forward linkage with 
the industrial sector by supplying raw materials, the forward linkage is small. 
Þ The present features of Ethiopia’s socio-economic development has been 
showing an encouraging progress since 1992. Growth in the various sectors 
is being achieved. The service sector is exhibiting a dynamic change when 
compared to the other two sectors. 
Þ Although these changes are achieved, attaining sustainable growth and 
an end to poverty is a challenge. Various and consecutive but inter–
related development policies and strategies are in process to meet the 
challenges. For example, 
Þ Sustainable Development and Poverty Reduction program (2000 – 2004) 
Þ Plan for Accelerated and Sustainable Development to End Poverty (2005 
–2010) 
Þ Growth and Transformation Program (2010 – 2015)
Þ Ethiopia’s economic relationships with neighboring and other countries 
developed over time. Because the existing political situations in most of the 
neighboring countries, its trade relationships with other counties is strong. 
Þ The targets set by PASDEP appear to be sound. Remarkable achievements 
are being seen in the expansion of roads, schools, energy supply plants, 
export earnings, etc. 
Grade 12 Geography 230
Unit Review
 REVIEW EXERCISE FOR UNIT 5 
I Indicate whether each statement is True or False.
1 Compared to economic development, economic growth is a wider and more 
multifaceted concept.
2 Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present 
generation without compromising the ability of the future generations to 
meet their own needs. 
3 Among Ethiopia’s economic sectors, the service/distributive sector has 
shown the highest growth performance. 
4 The top-level goal of ADLI is to ensure economic growth through an urbancentered development strategy. 
5 The full potential of Ethiopia’s resources related to agriculture have not yet 
been utilized. 
II Match the Items under Column A with those of B.
A B
6 Poverty trap 
7 Labor and diversified 
agro-climatic zones 
8 SDPRP
9 WTO 
10 GTP
A The inter-related socio-economic 
factors that hinder Ethiopia’s progress. 
B A development strategy that covered the 
period 2002-2004. 
C The recent development strategy and 
policy that was adopted for 2010-2015 
D An international economic organization 
that promotes trade between the 
developed and developing countries 
through loose tariff protection. 
E Features to be utilized for the socioeconomic development of Ethiopia. 
Unit 5: ECONOMIC GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT TREND IN ETHIOPIA 231
Unit Review
III Choose the best answer among the suggested alternatives. 
11 Which sub-sector of the service/distributive sector showed the best growth 
performance during the fiscal year 2005/2006? 
A Hotels and restaurants
B Banking and insurance
C Education 
D Transport and communication 
12 The development program and strategy that was launched in 2002 to 
improve the economy of Ethiopia sought to overcome
A Rapid population growth 
B Unexpected weather changes 
C Low levels of infrastructure 
D Diversified climatic zones
13 All are the challenges to Ethiopia’s socio-economic development except 
A Rapid population growth 
B Unexpected weather changes 
C Low level of infrastructure 
D Diversified climatic zones 
14 Which one of the following might facilitate Ethiopia’s socio-economic 
development? 
A expansion of exports by diversifying exportable items 
B slowing down the existing rapid population growth 
C utilizing the potential of Ethiopia’s women 
D all of the above 
15 Which country has been the single most important destination for Ethiopia’s 
exports? 
A England 
B Japan
C Germany 
D USA
Grade 12 Geography 232
Unit Review
16 The two most important sources of Ethiopian imports in recent years have 
been 
A England and Germany
B Saudi Arabia and China
C Djibouti and Egypt
D China and Japan 
17 The external factor (s) that negatively affected PASDEP was/were 
A the poor rainfall experienced in 2005/06 
B the global financial crises of 2008/09
C less support than expected offered by foreign donors 
D B and C
IV Give short answers. 
18 List the major export and imports of Ethiopia in order of importance. 
19 Attempt to explain the major problems that have hindered agricultural 
development in Ethiopia. 
20 Compare and contrast the developmental strategies adopted in Ethiopia 
before and after 1991.
