Before the beginning of the 18th century, it was easy to study and remember the
properties of the elements because very few were known. However, in the middle of
the 19th century, many more elements were discovered. Scientists then began to
investigate possibilities for classifying the known elements in a simple and useful
manner. After numerous attempts, the scientists were ultimately successful. They
grouped elements with similar properties together. This arrangement is known as the
classification of elements.
Early Attempts in classifying the elements
What is meant by the term periodicity? Can you give some periodic events in
nature?
Early attempts to classify elements were based merely on atomic mass. Then scientists
began to seek relationships between atomic mass and other properties of the
elements.
i) Dobereiner's Triads: One of the first attempts to group similar elements was
made in 1817 by the German chemist J. Dobereiner. He put together similar
elements in group of three or triads. According to Dobereiner, when elements in
a triad are arranged in the order of increasing atomic masses, the middle element
had the average atomic mass of the other two elements. For example, because
the atomic mass of bromine is nearly equal to the average atomic mass of
chlorine and iodine, he considered these three elements to constitute a triad when
arranged in this order: chlorine, bromine, iodine see Table 2.2.
Table 2.2 Dobereiner's Triads.
Triads Atomic Masses
Chlorine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35.5
Bromine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Iodine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Average atomic masses of chlorine and iodine = 
35.5 127 +
2 = 81.25
Reading Check
Do you think that this classification works for all elements?
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
38
ii) Newlands's Law of Octaves: In 1864, John Newlands, an English chemist,
reported the law of octave, which is also known as the law of eight. He stated
that when elements are arranged in increasing order of their atomic masses,
every eighth element had similar properties to the first element.
 Newlands first two octaves of eight elements are shown below:
Li Be B C N O F
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl
K Ca
However, the law of octaves could not be applied beyond calcium.
Reading Check
With the aid of an encyclopedia, reference books or other resources, write a report
on:
a J. Dobereiner and
b J. Newlands works in organizing the elements.
In your report include the merits and demerits of their works.
Exercise 2.1
1. Decide whether the principle of Dobereiner’s triad can be applied in the following
groups of three elements.
a Be, Ca, Sr b Li, Na, K
2. Newlands stated that there was a periodic similarity in properties of every
eighth element in his system. However, today we see that for periods 2 and 3,
the similarity occurs in every ninth element. What is the reason? Explain.
2.2 The Modern Periodic Table
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• state Mendeleev’s and modern periodic law;
• describe period and group;
• explain the relationship between the electronic configuration and the structure of
the modern periodic table;
• describe the three classes of the elements in the modern periodic table;
• explain the four blocks of the elements as related to their electronic
configuration in the modern periodic table;
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
39
• tell the block of an element from its electronic configuration;
• give group names for the main group elements;
• classify the periods into short, long, and incomplete periods;
• tell the number of groups and periods in the modern periodic table;
• tell the number of elements in each period;
• predict the period and group of an element from its atomic number; and
• tell the block and group of an element from its electronic configuration.
Form a group and perform the following tasks. Share your findings with the rest of the
class.
1. Make a list of the symbols for the first eighteen elements. Beside each symbol, write
its electronic configuration.
2. Draw sets of vertical boxes. In order of increasing atomic number, fill into each set the
symbol of all elements having the same outer electron configurations. How many sets
are there? Record your answer.
3. Draw sets of horizontal boxes. In order of increasing atomic number, fill into each set
the symbols of all elements having the same number of shells. How many sets are
there? How many elements are there in each set? Record your answers.
4. Do you see any regular patterns that you created in Steps 2 and 3?
5. Draw one complete table which shows all elements;
a with the same number of outermost electrons in a vertical column
b filling the same outer electron shell in a horizontal row.
While attempting to group the elements according to their
chemical properties and atomic weights, Dimitri Mendeleev
developed the periodic table and formulated the periodic law.
Because his classification revealed recurring patterns (periods) in
the elements, Mendeleev was able to leave spaces in his table for
elements that he correctly predicted would be discovered.
Dimitri Mendeleev
Historical Note
Activity 2.2
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
40
2.2.1 The Periodic Law
A. Mendeleev’s Periodic Law
In 1869, the Russian chemist Dimitri Mendeleev and the German scientist Luthar
Meyer independently published periodic arrangements of the elements based on
increasing atomic mass.
Mendeleev observed that, when elements are arranged according to increasing atomic
mass, the chemical and physical properties of the elements recur at regular intervals.
This periodic variation and the recurrence of the properties of the elements led to the
formulation of the Periodic Law.
Mendeleev's periodic law states that the properties of the elements are periodic
functions of their atomic masses. Only 63 elements were known when Mendeleev
constructed his table in 1871. Mendeleev organized his table in columns, with each
column containing elements that have similar chemical properties. Accordingly,
elements in the same column gave family or groups of elements.
How did Mendeleev know where to leave gaps for undiscovered elements in his
periodic table?
Mendeleev left blank spaces for the undiscovered elements and also predicted masses
and other properties of these unknown elements almost correctly. For example,
neither gallium nor germanium were discovered when Mendeleev constructed his
periodic table. But he predicted the existence and properties of these unknown
elements.
Mendeleev left two blank spaces for these two elements in the table, just under
aluminium and silicon. He called these unknown elements 'eka-aluminium' and 'ekasilicon.' ('eka' means 'first'). What he meant by 'eka-aluminium' is "a currently known
element (galium) following aluminium".
Later on, in 1874, the element Gallium (eka-aluminium in Mendeleev's system) was
discovered. In 1886, the element Germanium (eka-silicon) was discovered. The
observed properties of these elements were remarkably very close to those in
Mendeleev’s predictions. Table 2.3 shows the properties of eka-silicon predicted by
Mendeleev and compares them to the observed properties of Germanium.
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
41
Table 2.3 Comparison of Mendeleev's predictions for the properties of Eka-silicon with
Germanium.
Property Mendeleev's Observed Properties for
Predictions for Germanium (Ge) in 1886
eka-silicon (Es) in 1871
Atomic mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 72.6
Density (g/cm3
) . . . . . . . . . . . 5.5 5.47
Colour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Dark Gray Light Gray
Oxide formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . EsO2 GeO2
Density of oxide (g/cm3
) . . . . . 4.7 4.7
Chloride formula . . . . . . . . . . . EsCl4 GeCl4
Density of chloride (g/cm3
) . . . 1.9 1.887
Boiling point of chloride . . . . . < 100°C 86°C
Defects in Mendeleev's periodic table
1. Position of isotopes: The isotopes were not given separate places in Mendeleev's
periodic table. Since elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic masses,
the isotopes belong to different groups (because isotopes have different masses).
2. Wrong order of atomic masses of some elements: When certain elements are
grouped on the basis of their chemical properties, some elements with higher
atomic masses precede those with lower atomic masses. For example, argon,
with atomic mass of 39.95, precedes potassium with atomic mass of 39.1.
B The Modern Periodic Law
What was Mosley's contribution to the modern form of the Periodic Table?
In 1913, the English physicist Henry Mosley determined the atomic number of each of
the elements by analyzing their X-ray spectra. He observed that when each element
was used as a target in an X-ray tube, it gave out X-rays with a characteristic
wavelength. The wavelength depends on the number of protons in the nucleus of the
atom and was constant for a given element. By arranging the elements in order of
decreasing wavelength, Mosley was able to assign atomic number to each element.
The atomic number of every element is fixed, and it clearly distinguishes one element
from another. 'No two elements can have the same atomic number.' For example,
atomic number 8 identifies the element oxygen. No other element can have atomic
number 8.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
42
Therefore, the atomic number of an element is the fundamental property that
determines the chemical behavior of the element. The discovery of atomic number led
to the development of the modern periodic law. The modern periodic law states that:
‘‘the properties of the elements are periodic function of their atomic numbers.’’ This
means that when elements are arranged according to increasing atomic number,
elements with similar physical and chemical properties fall in the same group.
2.2.2 Characteristics of Groups and Periods
Many different forms of the periodic table have been published since Mendeleev's
time. Today, the long form of the periodic table, which is called the modern periodic
table, is commonly in use. It is based on the modern periodic law. In the modern
periodic table, elements are arranged in periods and groups.
What are the basis for classifying the elements into groups and periods?
What are the similarities and differences in the electron configuration of S
and Cl?
Periods: The horizontal rows of elements in the periodic table are called periods or
series.
Elements in a period are arranged in increasing order of their atomic numbers from left
to right.
There are 7 periods in the modern periodic table, and each period is represented by
an Arabic numeral: 1, 2 . . . and 7.
• Elements in the same period have the same number of shells.
• Periods 1, 2, and 3 are called short periods while periods 4, 5, and 6 are
known as long periods.
• Period 1 contains only 2 elements, hydrogen and helium. Period 2 and period 3
contain 8 elements each.
• Period 4 and period 5 contain 18 elements each. Period 6, the longest period,
has 32 elements. Period 7, which is an incomplete period, contains more than
24 elements.Period 7 element is radioactive and/or an artificial element.
• Except for the first period, all periods start with an alkali metal and ends with a
noble gas.
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
43
Table 2.4 The number of elements in a given period and the orbitals being filled.
Period number Orbitals occupied Number of elements
1 1s 2
2 2s, 2p 8
3 3s, 3p 8
4 4s, 3d, 4p 18
and so on
The position of an element in a given period can be determined by the number of
shells occupied with its electrons. Accordingly, the number of shell is equal to the
number of period to which the element belongs.
Example
Electronic configuration of 23
11 Na = 1s2
2s22p63s1 (2, 8, 1). Sodium has 3 main
shells. Hence, sodium is found in period 3.
What are the similarities and differences in the electron configuration of F
and Cl?
Groups or families: are the vertical columns of elements in the periodic table. There
are 18 columns or groups in the modern periodic table.
• Group numbers are usually designated with the Roman numerals I to VIII each
followed by the letter A or B.
These are: IA . . . . . . . . . VIII A Main groups (A groups)
IB . . . . . . . . . VIIIB Sub groups (B groups)
• Elements in a given group have the same number of outermost shell electrons.
• Elements in the same group have similar chemical properties.
• For the main group elements the group number equals the number of valence
electrons.
Example
Electronic configuration of 35
17Cl = 1s22s22p63s23p5
 (2, 8, 7). The number of
valence electrons of chlorine is 7. Hence chlorine is found in Group VIIA.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
44PERIODIC TABLE
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
45
Exercise 2.2
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. Which group of elements was missing from Mendeleev's periodic table as
compared to the modern periodic table?
2. Why does the first period contain only two elements?
3. To which group and period do the following elements belong?
a carbon d potassium
b neon e calcium
c aluminium f sulphur
2.2.3 CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
Perform the following tasks in groups and present your conclusion to the class.
For the following elements, determine the valence electrons, and identify the sub–shell
(s, p, d or f ) in which the last electron of each element enters.
a Nitrogen (atomic number = 7)
b Sodium (atomic number = 11)
c Silicon (atomic number = 14)
d Iron (atomic number = 26)
e Zinc (atomic number = 30)
f Krypton (atomic number = 36)
g Cerium (atomic number = 58)
Elements in a periodic table can be classified into three distinct categories based on
their electron configuration and the type of sub-level being filled. These are the
representative elements, the transition elements, and the rare-earth elements.
1. Representative Elements: s-and p-block elements
These are elements in which valence electrons are filling the s- or p-orbitals.
Representative elements are also known as Main Group Elements. They include
elements in groups IA through VIIIA.
s-block elements are elements in which the last electron enters the s-orbital of the
outermost shell. Their general valence shell configuration is ns1
 and ns2
, where n
represents the outermost shell. They are found on the left side of the periodic table
Activity 2.3
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
46
and contain the first two groups: Group IA and Group IIA. These two groups
contain very reactive metals.
p-block Elements are elements in which the last electron enters the p-orbital of the
outermost shell. They have the general valence shell electron configuration of ns2
np1
–
ns2
np6
. p-block elements are located at the right hand side of the periodic table and
they include six groups-Group IIIA to VIIIA. Most of these elements are non-metals.
Table 2.5 Valence electron configuration, blocks and common names for the
representative elements.
Group Common name General valence Number of
Number shell electron valence
configuration electrons
IA Alkali metals ns1 1
IIA Alkaline earth metals ns2 2
IIIA Boron family ns2
np1 3
IVA Carbon family ns2
np2 4
VA Nitrogen family ns2
np3 5
VIA Oxygen family (Chalcogen) ns2
np4 6
VIIA Halogens ns2
np5 7
VIIIA Noble gases (Inert gases) ns2
np6 except He 8
Why is helium classified as a noble gas?
2. Transition Elements: d-block elements
These elements are found in the periodic table between the s-block and p-block
elements. In these elements, the valence electrons are being added to the d-orbital of
the outermost shell. They are also known as d-block elements. They are designated
as 'B' group, and they consist of groups IB – VIIIB. The transition elements are found
in periods 4, 5, 6, and 7. They include common elements such as iron, gold, and
copper. d-block elements are also called transition metals.
3. Rare-Earth Elements: f-block elements
These elements are also known as inner-transition elements. They are elements in
which the last electrons are being added to the f-orbital of the outermost shell. The
inner transition elements are in periods 6 and 7. The period 6 inner transition series
fills the 4f-orbitals. It is known as the Lanthanide series because it occurs after the
element lanthanum and its elements are similar to it. The period 7 inner transition
series fills the 5f-orbitals and appears after the element actinium. Its elements are
similar to actinium, thus it is known as the Actinide series.
s-block
p-block
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
47
Figure 2.1 presents a scheme to show the basic structure of the periodic table. On the
basis of the electron configuration of the elements the table is divided into s, p, d and
f-blocks.
Figure 2.1 Division of the modern periodic table.
Reading Check
In the periodic table, you have seen a section called rare earth elements. Find this
term in an encyclopedia, in reference books, or in other resource material. Read
and analyze the information you find. Write a report on these elements.
Exercise 2.3
Give appropriate answers for the following questions:
1. For the following elements, write their electron configurations and determine
the group and period number of each element.
a Na, Ca, Al b Cl, S, Ar
2. Bromine is a Group VIIA and period-4 element. What is the valence shell
configuration of bromine?
3. Deduce the group, period, and block of the elements with atomic numbers:
a 37 b 24 c 32
Critical Thinking
4. Why is hydrogen, a non-metal, usually placed with Group I elements in the
periodic table, even though it does not show a metallic property like the alkali
metals?
2.3 PERIODIC PROPERTIES IN THE PERIODIC TABLE
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• explain the general trends in properties of the elements as they move down a
group of the periodic table;
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
48
Activity 2.4
• explain the general trends in properties of elements across a period;
• deduce the properties of an element from its position in the periodic table; and
• make a chart to show the trends in properties of elements in the periodic table.
Refer any chemistry book and look up values for atomic size, ionization energy,
electronegativity and other properties of elements. Enter the values in the periodic table,
and see if there any obvious trends in the properties as you go across a period or down a
column of the table. Report your findings to the class.
In the periodic table the properties of the elements such as atomic size, ionization
energy, electron affinity, and electronegativity show a regular variation with in a group
or across a period.
2.3.1 Periodic Properties within a Group
Elements in the same group have the same number of valence electrons and also
exhibit similar chemical properties. For example, group IA elements have 1 valence
electron; those in Group IIA have 2 valence electrons, and so on. Generally, it is
possible to conclude that the number of valence electrons determines the group
number of an element.
Table 2.6 Electron configuration and number of valence electrons of Group IA elements.
Element Electron Number of Group Number
Configuration Valence electron
Li 2, 1 1
Na 2, 8, 1 1
K 2, 8, 8, 1 1 IA
Rb 2, 8, 18, 8, 1 1
Cs 2, 8, 18, 18, 8, 1 1
The periodic properties of the elements can be explained on the basis of nuclear
charge and effective nuclear charge.
Nuclear charge (Z): is the total positive charge in the nucleus of an atom.
Effective Nuclear charge (Zeff): In an atom, the outermost shell electrons (or
valence electrons) are attracted to the nucleus and simultaneously repelled by the inner
shell electrons. The attraction of the nucleus for the valence electrons is also reduced
because inner electrons shield (or screen) the valence electrons. As a result, these
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
49
inner electrons reduce the attraction of the nuclear charge. The resulting net-positive
nuclear charge attracting the valence electrons is called effective nuclear charge, Zeff .
Effective nuclear charge relates the nuclear charge to the number of shells (size) of the
atom.
The effective nuclear charge is the difference between the nuclear charge (Z) and the
inner electrons (S) that shield the valence electrons. The effective nuclear charge is
always less than the actual nuclear charge.
Zeff = Z – S
Let us consider the sodium atom with its 11 electrons: 1s2
2s2
2p6
3s1
 (2, 8, 1). The 10
inner electrons of sodium completely cancel the 10 units of nuclear charge on the
nucleus. In this way, the inner electrons shield the valence electrons from the full
attractive force of the nucleus and leave an effective nuclear charge of + 1 (Zeff = + 1).
The fact that the inner electrons shield or screen the outer electrons from the full
charge of the nucleus is known as shielding or screening effect.
Form a group and perform the following task:
Draw Bohr's model for the following elements and indicate the shielding shells, shielding
electrons and effective nuclear charge:
a beryllium, magnesium and calcium;
b lithium, carbon and fluorine.
Present your findings to the class.
The following properties of elements vary in a regular periodic manner.
1. Nuclear Charge
On moving down a given group of the periodic table, nuclear charge progressively
increases, but effective nuclear charge remains nearly constant.
2. Atomic Size/Atomic Radius
Where in a group do you find atoms with the largest atomic radius? Why?
It is difficult to measure the size of an atom directly. The electron cloud enveloping the
nucleus does not have a clear boundary because its electrons do not have fixed
distances from the nucleus. Therefore, atoms do not have definite outer boundaries.
The size of an atom is defined in terms of its atomic radius. For metals, atomic radius
is defined as one-half the distance between the nuclei of the two adjacent atoms. For
Activity 2.5
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
50
Activity 2.6
elements that exist as diatomic molecules (such as chlorine), atomic radius is equal to
one-half of the distance between the nuclei of the atoms in the molecule. Figure 2.2
illustrates the atomic radius of chlorine in a chlorine molecule.
Chlorine
nucleus
Chlorine
Distance between nucleus
nuclei
Atomic
radius
99 pm
198 pm
Figure 2.2 The representation of atomic radius in a chlorine molecule.
In moving down a group, atomic radius of the elements mainly depends on the
number of shells.
Form a group and perform the following task; present your findings to the class.
The following values are given for atomic radii (in Å) of group IA elements:
1.54, 1.34, 2.35, 2.16 and 1.96
Based on the given information;
1. fill the following table with the number of shells and the appropriate values for atomic
radii corresponding to the symbols of the elements.
2. explain the reason for the observed trend.
Elements Number of Shells Atomic Radius (Å)
Li
Na
K
Rb
Cs
3. Ionization Energy
In which region of the periodic table do you find elements with the:
a lowest tendency to lose electrons, and
b highest tendency to lose electrons?
Ionization energy is the minimum energy required to remove the outermost shell
electron from an isolated gaseous atom or ion.
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
51
Activity 2.7
Ionization energy is represented by the following equation (where M denotes any
metal).
M (g) + energy ––––→ M+
 (g) + e–
The electrons in an atom can be successively removed, one after another. Thus, the
first ionization energy is the energy needed to remove the first valence electron, the
second ionization energy is the energy needed to remove the second valence electron,
and so on.
M (g) + energy ––––→ M+ (g) + e– ⇒ First ionization energy
M+ (g) + energy ––––→ M2+ (g) + e– ⇒ Second ionization energy
For a given element, the second ionization energy is higher than the first one.
Ionization energy is always a positive value (and therefore is an endothermic process)
because energy is required to remove an electron from an atom. Ionization energy is
measured in electron volts (eV) or kiloJoules per mole (kJ/mol).
Ionization energy is a measure of the tendency of an atom to lose an electron. Metals
easily lose electrons and thus have low ionization energy. Non-metals have high
ionization energy because they do not easily lose electrons.
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
Rank each set of the following elements in order of decreasing ionization energy and
explain the trend in ionization energy of the elements down a group.
i) Ca, Sr, Mg, Be
ii) K, Li, Rb, Na
iii) Cl, F, I, Br
Generally, ionization energy is affected by the following factors:
i) Atomic size: As atomic size increases, the valence electrons are less tightly
held by the nucleus. Thus, less energy is required to remove these electrons.
For example, the energy needed to remove an electron from a cesium atom is
lower than from a lithium atom.
ii) Effective nuclear charge: The smaller the effective nuclear charge of an atom,
the lower is the energy needed to remove an electron from the atom.
iii) Types of electrons: The closer an electron is to the nucleus, the more difficult
it is to remove the electron. In a given energy level, s-electrons are closer to
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
52
the nucleus than p-electrons. Similarly, p-electrons are closer than d-electrons,
and d-electrons are closer than f-electrons. Hence, ionization energy
decreases in the order of: s > p > d > f.
iv) Screening effect by the inner electrons: As described earlier, inner shell
electrons shield the valence electrons from the nuclear charge. The more inner
electrons there are, the higher the screening effect, and therefore the easier it
is to remove the valence electrons. Screening decreases ionization energy.
v) Electron configuration (stability): It is easier to remove electrons from unstable
sublevels than from stable ones. Half-filled (p3
, d5
, f 7
) and completely-filled
(d10, p6
, f 14) sublevels are more stable. For example, more energy is
required to remove a p3
 electron than a p4
 electron. As a result of it, the first
ionization energy of nitrogen is higher than that of oxygen.
Generally, with the increasing atomic number, the first ionization energy decreases
down the same group.
Activity 2.8
After studying the given information, identify the elements represented by X, M, and Y;
discuss the findings in your group, and then share your conclusion with the other groups.
Element X
• has a relatively high ionization energy.
• generally forms an ion with a – 2 charge.
• has an outermost electron configuration of 3s2
3p4
.
Element M
• reacts with oxygen to form M2
O.
• has a very low ionization energy.
• is in the fourth period of the periodic table.
Element Y
• is a transition element.
• is used in Ethiopian coinage.
• has 10 electrons in the 3d orbital
4. Electron Affinity (EA)
To which group it is easier to add electrons; alkali metals or halogens?
Non-metals gain electrons and therefore form negative ions. The tendency of an atom
to form a negative ion is expressed in terms of electron affinity (EA).
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
53
Electron affinity is defined as the energy released in kilojoules/mole, when an electron
is added to an isolated gaseous atom to form a gaseous ion. It is a measure of the
attraction or ‘affinity’ of the atom for the extra added electron.
X(g) + e–
 ––––→ X–
 (g) + energy
Since energy is liberated during the process, electron affinity is expressed as a
negative value. For example, when an electron is added to a fluorine (F) atom, 328
kJ/mol of energy is released to produce a fluoride ion (F–
), and EA is – 328 kJ/mol.
F(g) + e–
 ––––→ F–
 (g) + EA = – 328 kJ/mol
Electron affinity is a measure of the strength of an atom to attract an additional
electron. The smaller is the atomic size of an element, the stronger is the tendency to
form negative ions, and consequently the higher the electron affinity. Generally,
electron affinity depends on atomic size and effective nuclear charge of the elements.
Activity 2.9
Form a group and discuss the following concepts.
1. Why does the electron affinity of Cl is higher than that of F?
2. Explain why noble gases have extremely low (almost zero) electron affinities?
3. Explain why halogens have the highest electron affinities?
Present your findings to the class.
5. Electronegativity
Where do you find the most electronegative element in the periodic table?
Electronegativity is the ability of an atom in a molecule to attract the shared electrons
in the chemical bond. The American chemist Linus Pauling (1901-1994) developed
the most widely used scale of electronegativity values based on bond strength. The
Pauling scale ranges from 0.7 to 4.0. Fluorine, the most electronegative element, is
assigned a value of 4.0, and the least electronegative element, cesium, has an
electronegativity value of 0.7. The electronegativity values for all the rest elements lie
between these extremes.
The electronegativity of an atom is related to its ionization energy and electron affinity.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
54
Activity 2.11
Activity 2.10
An atom with high ionization energy and high electron affinity also tends to have a high
electronegativity value because of its strong attraction for electrons in a chemical
bond.
Form a group, perform the following task and present your findings to the class:
1. The members of group IVA of the periodic table are: Ge, Sn, C, Pb and Si.
Classify these elements into metals, non-metals and metalloids.
2. Explain the differences between silicon and lead in terms of:
a Atomic size
b Ionization energy
c Electron affinity
d Electronegativity
Form a group and perform the following task:
Arrange each set of the given elements in order of decreasing electronegativity and
explain the observed trend.
a Ba, Mg, Be, Ca
b C, Pb, Ge, Si
c Cl, F, I , Br
Present your findings to the class.
6. Metallic Character
In which region of the periodic table do you find metals and non-metals?
Metals have the tendency to lose electrons and form positive ions. As a result, metals
are called electropositive elements.
In moving down a group, atomic size increases progressively, and it becomes easier
for elements to lose their valence electrons and form positive ions. Therefore, metallic
character increases down a group.
In the periodic table, metals and non-metals are separated by a stair step diagonal
line, and elements near this border line are called metalloids. Metals are found on the
left side of the line and nonmetals on its right side.
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
55
Activity 2.12
Exercise 2.4
Part I: Choose the correct answer from the given choices
1. Which of the following properties of the elements remain unchanged down a
group?
a Ionization energy c Electron affinity
b Nuclear charge d Valence electrons
2. Which of the following elements has the largest atomic size?
a Be c Ca
b Ba d Mg
3. Which of the following elements has the lowest electronegativty?
a F b Br c I d Cl
Part II: Give short answers for the following
4. What is screening effect? How does it relate to effective nuclear charge?
5. What is the relationship between first ionization energy and the metallic
properties of elements?
2.3.2 Periodic Properties within a Period
Form a group and draw a rough sketch of the periodic table (no details are required). Based
on this, perform the following activities and present your findings to the class.
1. Indicate the regions where metals, non-metals, and metalloids are located in the
periodic table. (Use different colours).
2. Where do you find the most active metal and the most active non-metal? .
As we move from left to right across a period, the number of valence electrons of the
elements increases. But the number of energy levels or main shells remains the same
in a given period and electrons are filling the same energy level until stable noble gas
configuration is achieved. The additional electrons from Li (2, 1) to Ne (2, 8) are
added to the second shell. In fact, the period number equals the number of energy
level being filled.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
56
Activity 2.14
Table 2.7 Electron configuration and number of shells for period-2 elements.
Elements Li Be B C N O F Ne
Atomic number 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Electron configuration 2, 1 2, 2 2, 3 2, 4 2, 5 2, 6 2, 7 2, 8
Number of shells
(period number) 2 2 2 2 2 2 22
Let us now consider periodic properties of elements across a period.
1. Atomic Size: From left to right in a given period, nuclear charge or atomic
number progressively increases by one for every succeeding element. However,
increasing number of valence electrons is being added to the same shell. This
results in an increase in effective nuclear charge.
Activity 2.13
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
The following values are given for atomic radii (in Å) of period 2 elements:
0.77, 1.34, 0.69, 0.75, 0.73, 0.82, 0.90, and 0.71.
Based on the information given;
1. fill the table given below with the appropriate values for atomic radii of the
elements.
2. explain the reason for the observed trend.
Element Li Be B C N O F Ne
Atomic radii (Å)
2. Ionization Energy: Two factors account for the general trend in ionization
energy across a given period. These are nuclear charge and atomic size.
Form a group and perform the following task, and present your findings to the class.
The following table lists ionization energy values of period 3 elements
Elements Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
Ionization energy (kJ/mol) 496 738 578 787 1012 1000 1251 1521
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
57
1. Explain why there is a general increase in the first ionization energy across
the period from Na to Ar.
2. Explain why the first ionization energy of:
i) aluminium is lower than that of magnesium.
ii) sulphur is lower than that of phosphorus.
(Hint: Use sublevel configurations for the elements).
3. Electron Affinity: The variation in electron affinity of elements in the same
period is due to changes in nuclear charge and atomic size of the elements.
A cross a period from left to right, electron affinity increases due to an increase
in effective nuclear charge. The elements show a greater attraction for an extra
added electron.
4. Electronegativity: Across a period, a gradual change in nuclear charge and
atomic size determine the trends in the electronegativity of the elements.
Activity 2.15
Form a group and perform the following task. Present your findings to the class.
The following values are given for electronegativity of period 3 elements:
2.1, 0.9, 1.5, 3.0, 1.8, 2.5 and 1.2
Based on the information given;
1. Draw a table of period 3 elements and fill with the appropriate electronegativity
values corresponding to the symbols of the elements.
2. Explain the reason for the observed trend.
5. Metallic character: From left to right in a period, metallic character of the
elements decreases. Elements on the left end of a period have a higher tendency
to form positive ions. Those at the right end have a greater tendency to form
negative ions. In any period, elements on the left side are metals and those on
the right side are nonmetals.
Consider the following period-3 elements and observe how the elements become
more non-metallic on moving from left to right in the periodic table:
Elements Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
Character Metals Metalloid Non-metals
 
Metallic character decreases
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
58
Model of a periodic table
The following table shows a section of a periodic table. It is incomplete. According to the
data given in table 2.8,
a Construct a model of this section of the periodic table using locally available
materials to show the trends in atomic radii of the elements.
b Complete the section of the periodic table with the elements in the appropriate
position.
Table 2.8 Atomic number and atomic radii of some selected elements.
Element Atomic Atomic Element Atomic Atomic
number radii (nm) number radii (nm)
Li 3 0.123 Al 13 0.125
Be 4 0.089 Si 14 0.117
B 5 0.080 P 15 0.110
C 6 0.077 S 16 0.104
N 7 0.074 Cl 17 0.099
O 8 0.074 Ar 18 0.099
F 9 0.072 K 19 0.203
Ne 10 - Rb 37 0.216
Na 11 0.157 Cs 55 0.235
Mg 12 0.136
(Hint: Be innovative. Use cheap local material available to you. Your teacher will help you
whenever necessary.)
Questions:
Give reasons for the increase or decrease in atomic radii that you observe in your model:
i from lithium to fluorine and sodium to chlorine
ii from lithium to cesium
Present your findings to your class teacher.
 Project work
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
59
Activity 2.16
Exercise 2.5
Give appropriate answers for the following questions.
1. The element with the electron configuration of 1s2 2s2
2p6 3s2
3p6
 is a:
a metal b non-metal c metalloid d noble gas
2. Which of the main groups in the periodic table has the elements with the
most negative value of electron affinity?
a halogens b noble gases c Alkali metals d none
3. Which of the following is the correct increasing order of atomic size for the
elements: Al, Ar, Na, Si?
a Si, Na, Al, Ar c Ar, Si, Al, Na
b Na, Al, Si, Ar d Al, Si, Ar, Na
Critical Thinking
4. Explain why the first ionization energy of nitrogen is the highest as
compared to that of carbon and oxygen.
5. Compare the elements fluorine and chlorine with respect to their
electronegativity and electron affinity values.
2.4 ADVANTAGES OF PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION
Competencies
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• describe the advantages of periodic classification in studying chemistry.
Form a group and discuss the importance of the periodic table for predicting the atomic
size and ionization energy of the elements. Share your idea with the class.
Why do we need the classification of elements?
The main advantages of using the periodic table are:
1. The periodic table is useful for predicting the formulas of compounds. The
elements in a given group form compounds with the same atomic ratio
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
60
because of their similar electron configuration. For example, if the chemical
formula of sodium oxide is Na2
O, then we can predict the formulas of the
other oxides of alkali metals. These are Li2
O, K2
O, Rb2
O, and Cs2
O.
2. The periodic table is useful for predicting the physical and chemical properties
of elements. For example, radium is a rare and radioactive element and
therefore difficult to handle in many experiments. Since its properties can be
predicted from the general trends of group IIA elements, sometimes we do
not need to analyze it directly.
3. The periodic table is also useful for predicting the behaviour of many
compounds. For example, oxides of the elements become more acidic across
a period and more basic in character down a group. The trends in the oxides
of period-3 elements vary from strongly basic oxides to amphoteric and then
acidic oxides as we move across a period.
Table 2.9 Oxides of period 3 elements.
Na2
O MgO Al2
O3 SiO2 P4
O10 SO3 Cl2
O7
Basic oxide Amphoteric Acidic oxide
oxide
For a given element, the important information indicated below, in i, ii and iii can be
read, deduced or stated from the periodic table.
Atomic number
Atomic mass
Name
Symbol
Read the
Number of protons s and electron
Character (behavior) as metal, non metal, or metalloid
Nature (property) of the oxides to form ... acids, bases
Electron configuration (
)
number of shells and of
valence electrons Deduce the
( )i
( )ii
Based on the information in i and ii, we can:
State the
Period number
Block type ( , , or ) s p d f
( ) iii Group number and
PERIODIC CLASSIFICATION OF THE ELEMENTS
61
Diagonal Relationship
How do you account for the unexpected resemblance of the properties of
the following sets of elements: Li and Mg, Be and Al, and B and Si?
In addition to the group and period relationships, the elements of s and p block
also exhibit diagonal relationship. On moving diagonally across the periodic table, the
elements show certain similarities. Though clear upon examination, these diagonal
relationships are far less pronounced than the similarities within a group.
Diagonal relationship is particularly noticeable in the elements of second and third
periods of the periodic table. The following illustrations show the diagonal relationship
between Li and Mg, Be and Al, and B and Si.
Li 
Mg Al 
Be B 
Si 
Check List
Key terms of the unit
• Actinide series
• Atomic size
• Block of elements
• Dobereiner's traids
• Effective nuclear charge
• Electron affinity
• Electron configuration
• Electronegativity
• Groups
• Inner transition elements
• Ionization energy
• Lanthanide series
• Law of octave
• Mendeleev's law
• Metalloids
• Metals
• Non-metals
• Nuclear charge
• Periodic law
• Periodic table
• Periods
• Representative elements
• Shielding ( screening) effect
• Transition elements
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 9
62
Unit Summary
• Early attempts of classification of the elements were made by Dobereiner and
Newlands.
• Mendeleev’s law states that properties of the elements are periodic functions of
their atomic masses.
• Mendeleev arranged the elements based on increasing atomic mass.
• Modern periodic law states that the properties of the elements are periodic
function of their atomic numbers.
• Periods are horizontal rows, and groups are vertical columns of the elements in
the periodic table.
• Elements in the same group show similar chemical properties.
• Elements are classified as representative, transition, and rare-earth elements.
This classification is based on the type of sub-level (s, p, d, or f) being filled.
• Ionization energy is the energy required to remove the outermost shell electron
from an isolated gaseous atom.
• Electron affinity of an element is the energy released when an electron is added
to an isolated gaseous atom to form a gaseous ion.
• Metallic character is the tendency to lose electrons and form positively charged
ions.
• Electronegativity of an element is its ability to attract electrons.
• Trends in atomic size determine the trends in ionization energy, electron affinity,
electronegativity, and metallic character of the elements in the periodic table.
• Atomic size itself is determined by the number of energy levels, nuclear charge,
and effective nuclear charge.
• Periodic properties of elements, such as ionization energy, electron affinity,
electronegativity, etc. show regular variation within a group or period