Electrochemistry is a field of chemistry that deals with the relationship between
electrical energy and chemical energy. It is a field of chemistry concerned with
processes that bring about chemical reactions (changes) using electricity or generating
electrical energy from chemical reactions. Thus, electrical energy and chemical energy
are inter-convertible.
The devices that convert chemical energy to electrical energy or electrical energy to
chemical energy are called electrochemical cells. These cells can be classified as
electrolytic cells and galvanic or voltaic cells. Electrolytic cells use electrical energy to
bring about chemical changes that produce many desirable substances in our daily
lives. Galvanic or voltaic cells convert chemical energy to electrical energy. The cells
we use in flashlight batteries, wrist watches, cameras and car batteries are examples
of Galvanic cells. The reactions between the chemicals in these cells are responsible
for the generation of electricity.
Electrochemistry has practical applications in our modern world and in everyday life.
Electrolysis is used to manufacture metals like sodium, aluminium; non-metals like
chlorine, hydrogen and compounds like sodium hydroxide and sodium hypochlorite.
Electrochemistry also has a role in the production of dry cells and lead storage
batteries used in the automotive industry.
Activity 3.1
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
163
3.2 ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY
Competencies
After completing this subunit, you will be able to:
• define electrical conductivity;
• explain metallic conductivity;
• explain electrolytic conductivity;
• distinguish between metallic and electrolytic conduction;
• distinguish between weak and strong electrolytes;
• use conductivity apparatus to test the conductivity of substances.
Why do metals conduct electricity? Do you know any non-metal, which conducts
electricity? Electrical conductivity is the capacity of a substance to transmit electricity.
The materials that allow the passage of electricity through them are called electrical
conductors.
Conductivity apparatus is used to test the conductivity of different solid substances or
that of aqueous solutions of different compounds. The basic components of
conductivity apparatus include electric wires, electrodes, a d.c. source or dry cells, a
switch and light bulb. The components of the apparatus can be connected to one
another as shown in Figure 3.1.
+ –
Battery
Switch
Aqueous solution
of a substance
Carbon
electrodes
Figure 3.1 Conductivity cell.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
164
Depending on the nature of the particles responsible for the flow of electric charges
through conductors, electrical conductivity can be classified as metallic conductivity or
electrolytic conductivity.
a) Metallic conductivity
1. With the help of your teacher collect pieces of iron bars, zinc metal, sodium chloride
crystal, rubber stoppers, rubber bands, coins, stone, glass, pieces of dry wood, a spoon, a
pencil, chalk and solid sulphur.
2. Identify the substances that conduct electricity and classify them as conductors and
non-conductors.
3. From your observations above, (a) what type of solids conduct electricity, (b) why do
you think some of the materials conduct electricity? (c) Does graphite have the same
nature as the other conductors of electricity?
Discuss in groups and present it to the class
Why do metals transmit electric current? What are the charge carriers in metals?
Metallic conductivity refers to the transmission of electric current through metals. This
transmission is directly related to the structure of metals. In atoms of metals, the
valence electrons are bounded very loosely to their respective nuclei and move very
easily throughout the metal. This means metals contain electrons that do not have fixed
positions and are relatively free to move. These electrons are called free electrons or
mobile electrons or delocalized electrons. Thus, the structure of the metals can be
regarded as a series of positively charged metal ions, or cations, in a sea of negatively
charged electrons.
Free Electrons Nucleus
Electron
in
Electron
out
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
Figure 3.2 Electrical conductivity in metals.
Activity 3.2
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
165
The electrons entering the metal displace (repel) the freely moving electrons at the
point of entry. The displaced electrons occupy new positions by pushing neighbouring
electrons ahead. This will continue until electrons are forced out of the wire at the
opposite end. So, metallic conductivity is caused by the flow of mobile electrons due
to repulsion exerted on them from the electrons entering the metal from the source of
electricity. The charge carriers in metallic conduction are electrons. Hence, metallic
conductivity is also called electronic conductivity.
Non-metals are generally non-conductors of electricity, because they do not have freely
moving electrons. Graphite is a form of carbon in which the carbon atoms are bonded in
trigonal planar fashion to the three other carbon atoms, to form inter-connected hexagonal
rings, as shown in Figure3.3. Electrons move freely through the hexagonal layers, making
graphite a good conductor of electricity.
Figure 3.3 Structure of graphite (The blue colour is added to emphasize the planarity of the carbon layers.)
b) Electrolytic conductivity
Electrolytes are substances that transmit electricity in a molten state or in aqueous
solution. Based on their degree of ionization or the extent to which they produce
anions and cations, electrolytes can be classified as strong electrolytes or weak
electrolytes. Strong electrolytes ionize almost completely in aqueous solutions. Weak
electrolytes ionize only slightly. When electrical potential is applied through an
electrolyte solution, the positive ions (cations) move in one direction and the negative
ions (anions) move in the opposite direction. This movement of ions through the
electrolyte, brought about by the application of electricity, is called electrolytic
conductivity. Hence, the charge-carriers in electrolytic conductivity are ions (anions
and cations).
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
166
 Experiment 3.1
Construct a conductivity apparatus in your group. To construct the apparatus,
you will need a light bulb, three dry cells, some electric wire, two graphite
electrodes and a switch. You can get the graphite electrodes by peeling off
two old dry cells. A graphite electrode is the long cylindrical black rod inside
the cell. Ask your teacher for further assistance. Assemble the materials as
shown in Figure 3.4. Demonstrate the experimental set-up to the class.
Project 3.1
Conductivity of electrolytes
Objectives: To test the conductivity of different electrolytes.
Materials required: Conductivity apparatus, distilled water, table salt, copper
sulphate, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, ammonia solution,
molten lead bromide and sugar solution.
Procedure:
1. Arrange the conductivity apparatus as shown in Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4 Conductivity of electrolytic solution.
2. Pour some distilled water in the beaker, dip the electrodes into the water and
turn the switch on.
3. Repeat the experiment with separate solutions of table salt, copper sulphate,
hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, ammonia and sugar solutions
(use 1.0 M solutions of each).
+ – Battery
Switch
Aqueous solution
of an electrolyte
Anode (+) Cathode (–)
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
167
Observations and Analysis:
a Does the bulb glow when the switch is turned on?
b Solutions of which substances make the bulb glow and not glow, when you
turn on the switch?
c Solutions of which substances make the bulb to glow with a:
i bright light?
ii dim light?
d Classify the substances used in this experiment as strong conductors, weak
conductors and non-conductors by completing the table below:
Strong conductors Weak conductors Non-conductors
e Which substances in the experiment are used as:
i strong electrolytes ii weak electrolytes
Write a laboratory report on what you have observed and submit to your teacher.
Exercise 3.1
1. Explain the difference between i) metallic and electrolytic conductivity ii)
electrolyte and non-electrolyte.
2. Why do NaCl and CaCl2 conduct electricity when they are dissolved in water
or when they are in the molten form, but not in the solid state?
3. Why are solutions of strong electrolytes better conductors of electricity than
weak electrolytes?
The substances that do not transmit electricity either in solution or in a molten state are
called non-electrolytes. Ionic compounds are non-conductors of electricity in the solid
state. This is because their ions are held at fixed positions and cannot move. Other
examples of non-electrolytes include sugar, ethanol, oil, benzene, and liquid nitrogen.
3.3 ELECTROLYSIS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define the term electrolysis;
• define the terms electrode, anode, cathode, electrolyte, anion and cation;
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
168
• describe an electrolytic cell;
• draw and label a diagram of an electrolytic cell;
• define the terms half-cell reaction and cell reaction;
• write the oxidation half-reaction, reduction half-reaction and cell reaction for the
electrolysis of molten or fused electrolytes;
• perform an activity to show the electrolysis of molten electrolytes.
Give an opinion on the following questions and present your ideas to the class.
1. How do you identify whether an electrode is a cathode or an anode?
2. Can you suggest why positive and negative ions are named as cations and anions
respectively?
Electrolysis is a process in which electrical energy is used to produce chemical
changes. This process is carried out in an electrochemical cell known as an
electrolytic or electrolysis cell. A typical electrolysis cell contains a source of direct
electric current, an electrolyte and connecting wires that join the source to the
electrodes.
Electrodes are strips of metal or graphite that allow electrons to leave or enter the
electrolytes. They can be chemically active or inert. Active electrodes directly take
part in reactions. Examples include zinc and magnesium. Inert electrodes do not
directly take part in chemical reactions. They only serve to transfer electrons.
Examples include platinum and graphite.
The electrode connected to the positive terminal of the source is positively charged
and is called the anode. It is the electrode through which electrons leave the cell. The
electrode connected to the negative terminal of the source is negatively charged and is
called the cathode. It is the electrode through which electrons enter the cell.
During electrolysis, the ions of the electrolyte migrate to the electrodes of the opposite
charge. The positive ions are attracted to the cathode and are called cations. Since
the cathode has excess electrons, the cations will discharge by gaining electrons. This
process of gaining electrons is called reduction. The negative ions are attracted by the
positive electrode (anode) and are called anions. These ions are discharged by losing
electrons at the anode. This process of losing electrons is called oxidation.
Thus, the cathode is the electrode at which reduction occurs and the anode is the
electrode at which oxidation takes place.
Activity 3.3
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
169
The reaction that takes place at each electrode is known as a half-cell reaction. Oxidation
half-reactions occur at the anode and reduction half reaction at the cathode. The net
reaction that takes place in the electrolytic cell is known as a cell reaction. This overall
reaction is also referred to as an oxidation-reduction reaction or redox reaction. So
electrolysis is a process in which electric energy is used to bring about an oxidationreduction reaction. It is also defined as the decomposition of an electrolyte, using electricity.
The process of electrolysis includes electrolyzing aqueous solutions of electrolytes.
However, at this level, electrolysis of molten electrolytes will be discussed.
Electrolysis of Molten (Fused) Electrolytes
When ionic solids melt, they dissociates into positive and negative ions that are not
held in fixed positions. To understand the chemical reactions that occur during
electrolysis, consider a hypothetical electrolyte, MX, that dissociate into M+ and X–.
MX melting
→ M+ + X–
During electrolysis, the cations, M+ ions, move toward the cathode, gain one electron
each and become M atoms. The anions, X– ions, move toward the anode, lose one
electron and become X atoms. The reaction at each electrode and the entire reaction
in the electrolytic cell are represented by the following equations.
Cathode reaction: M+ + 1e– Æ M (Reduction-half reaction)
Anode reac tion: X–Æ X + 1e– (Oxidation half-reaction)
Cell reaction: M+ + X– electrolysis
→ M + X (Oxidation-reduction)
Figure 3.5 Electrolysis of fused Electrolyte, MX.
Here, it is very important to realize that the number of electrons gained by the cations
at the cathode is exactly equal to the number of electrons lost by anions at the anode
during electrolysis. This is true for any oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction.
Moreover, oxidation and reduction reactions proceed simultaneously. Reduction and
oxidation cannot occur separately. Oxidation is always accompanied by reduction and
there cannot be reduction in the absence of oxidation, and vice versa.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
170
 Experiment 3.2
Electrolysis of Molten (Fused) lead bromide
Electrolysis of fused lead Bromide (PbBr2 )
Objectives: To observe substances produced at the electrodes during electrolysis.
Materials required: Stand and clamp, two graphite electrodes, wires, switch, light
bulb, test tube (bigger in size), Bunsen burner, lead bromide crystals.
Precaution: Bromine causes very severe burn on the skin.
Procedure:
1. Assemble the materials as shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6 Electrolysis of Fused Lead Bromide.
2. Place small amount of lead bromide crystals in a beaker. Insert the two
electrodes, as shown in Figure 3.6, until they are in contact with the lead
bromide crystals. Then turn on the switch. Does the bulb glow?
3. Heat the lead bromide in a beaker gently, using a Bunsen burner. When the
lead bromide melts, turn on the switch.
Observations and Analysis:
1. Does the bulb glow? If yes, what is the reason?
2. Write the dissociation reaction for PbBr2.
3. Identify the ions which migrate to the respective electrodes.
4. Write the products formed at each electrode.
5. Identify the half reactions as oxidation and reduction.
Write a laboratory report on your observation and present to the class.
Molten lead
Bromine gas
Molten lead
bromide
+ –
Switch
Bulb
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
171
Exercise 3.2
Consider the electrolysis of KI and NaCl
a Identify ions which migrate towards the anode.
b Identify ions which migrate towards the cathode.
c Write down the half-reactions at the anode and cathode and cell reactions.
d Write the substances produced at the electrodes.
3.4 GALVANIC (VOLTAIC) CELLS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• construct a simple galvanic cell, using strips of zinc, copper, ZnSO4 and CuSO4
solutions;
• mention different types of voltaic cells;
• describe how voltaic cells can be used to make commercially useful batteries;
• distinguish between voltaic cell and an electrolytic cell;
• describe voltaic cells.
Discuss the following and present your ideas to the class:
1. Have you seen the expiry date written on dry cells? Can we get the expected amount
of electric energy after the expiry date of the cell; why?
2. Do we throw away car batteries when they fail to generate electricity? Explain.
3. Galvanic cells available in the market have positive and negative terminals. Does this
show that they also possess an anode and cathode?
In the previous section, electrolytic cells were defined as electrochemical cells in which
electricity was used to bring about chemical reactions. The chemical reaction in an
electrolytic cell is caused by electricity and is a non-spontaneous redox reaction. This
means the reaction can proceed only in the presence of electricity. If we stop passing
electricity through the electrolyte, the reaction will stop.
In a Galvanic cell, the reaction that occurs inside the cell is a spontaneous redox
reaction. The reaction that occurs inside the cell will proceed on its own without any
Activity 3.4
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
172
external influence. This reaction enables a galvanic cell to generate electricity.
Therefore, Galvanic cells are electrochemical cells in which spontaneous redox
reactions generate electricity. They convert chemical energy into electrical energy.
Galvanic or voltaic cells are classified into primary cells, secondary cells, and fuel
cells. For this level, only primary and secondary cells will be discussed.
Primary Cells
Primary galvanic cells are those cells that are not rechargeable. This is because the
electrode reaction as well as the entire cell reaction cannot be reversed on recharging.
Once the chemicals in the cells that serve as reactants are completely used up, it is
not possible to recover them by charging the cells. Examples of primary cells include
Daniel’s cell and zinc-carbon (Leclanche) dry cells. The common feature of all
Galvanic cells is that they contain two electrodes in contact with an electrolyte. The
electrolyte in a Galvanic cell can be in the form of a solution or a paste. The cells
containing electrolytes in the form of solution are called wet cells, and those containing
electrolytes in the form of paste are called dry cells.
An example of a wet primary cell is the Daniell cell. It consists of a zinc strip placed
in ZnSO4 solution in one compartment and a copper strip placed in copper sulphate,
CuSO4, solution in another compartment. Each compartment is called a half-cell, and
the reactions occurring in each compartment are called half-cell reactions. The
solutions in the two compartments are linked by a salt bridge as shown in Figure 3.7.
The salt bridge consists of a delivery tube filled with warm mixture of conc. KCl
solution and agar solution, which is then allowed to cool so that it sets in the form of
a gel.
Alternately, a porous barrier is used to separate the solutions. The zinc atoms from the
zinc electrode lose two electrons each and become zinc ions, Zn2+. The ions enter
into the solution, and the electrons remain on the electrode and flow through the
external wire to the copper electrode. This situation causes the zinc electrode to be
negative and the solution to have an overall positive charge.
On the other hand, in the compartment containing the copper electrode, copper ions,
Cu2+, from the solution move to the cathode and gain two electrons each, to become
copper atoms and deposit on the surface of the copper electrode. This condition
causes the electrode to be positive and the solution to have a negative charge.
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
173
Figure 3.7 The Daniell Cell.
Note that the anode is the negative electrode and the cathode is the positive electrode
in galvanic cells, as opposed to the situation in an electrolytic cell. But, it is always
oxidation that occurs at the anode and reduction at the cathode.
The half-cell reactions and the cell reaction in Daniell cells are represented as
Anode reaction: Zn (s) Æ Zn2+ (aq) + 2e–
Cathode reaction: Cu2+ (aq) + 2e– Æ Cu (s)
Cell reaction: Zn (s) + Cu2+ (aq) Æ Zn2+ (aq) + Cu (s)
Due to the oxidation-reduction reaction in the cell, the Daniell cell generates electricity.
What is the purpose of the salt bridge in Figure 3.7?
From the preceding discussion, it is clear that the solution in which the zinc electrode
is placed has an overall positive charge while the solution in the copper compartment
has a negative charge. Unless the two solutions are neutral, the cell cannot produce
electricity. Thus, the purpose of the salt bridge is to:
a maintain electrical neutrality between the two solutions. In this process the anions
(negative ions) from the salt bridge diffuse into the solution containing the zinc
electrodes, and the cations (positive ions) diffuse into the solution containing
the copper electrode to compensate for the excess positive and negative charges,
respectively;
Cu + 2e Cu
Reduction
2+ –
Zinc Copper
Zinc electrode Copper electrode
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
174
b allow electrical contact between the two solutions;
c prevent mixing of the electrode solutions.
Although, wet cells like the Daniell cell can serve as a source of electricity, they are
not portable since they contain solutions. Due to this practical problem of using wet
cells, dry cells were developed.
In a dry cell, a moist electrolyte paste is used instead of solutions. This cell was
invented by Georges Leclanche, a French chemist.
A zinc-carbon dry cell, which is also called a Leclanche cell (Figure 3.8) is used in
devices like portable radios and flashlights. The cell consists of a zinc cup that serves
as the anode. The zinc cup is filled with a paste of manganese (IV) oxide, zinc
chloride, ammonium chloride and powdered carbon. A graphite rod, immersed in this
paste, serves as the cathode.
Figure 3.8 Zinc-carbon dry cell (Leclanche cell).
A zinc-carbon dry cell produces electricity as a result of a spontaneous redox
reaction. Oxidation occurs at the zinc cup.
Oxidation: Zn (s) Æ Zn2+ (aq) + 2e–
Reduction takes place at the graphite (carbon) electrode.
2MnO2 (s) + 2NH+
4 (aq) + 2e– Æ Mn2O3 (s) + 2NH3 (aq) + H2O (l)
A build up of ammonia gas around the cathode may disrupt the current. However, this
is prevented by the reaction between Zn2+ and NH3 to form a complex ion,
[Zn(NH3)
2]
2+ which crystallizes as a chloride salt.
Zn2+ (aq) + 2NH3 (g) + 2Cl– (aq) Æ Zn(NH3)2 Cl2 (s)
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
175
The overall reaction occurring in a Leclanche cell is:
Zn (s) + 2MnO2 (s) + 2NH4Cl (aq) Æ Zn(NH3)
2Cl2 (s) + Mn2O3 (s) + H2O (l)
There are other examples of dry cells, such as the alkaline dry cell, silver oxide cell,
and copper oxide cell.
Exercise 3.3
1. In a Daniell cell, copper and zinc are used as electrodes. Which metal serves
as an anode and which one as a cathode? Is the anode the positive or the
negative terminal in this cell?
2. Which electrode is negative and which one is positive in the Leclanche cell? Is
the polarity of the electrodes in Galvanic cells similar to that of the electrodes
in electrolytic cells?
3. Why do we refer to the redox reactions in electrolytic and voltaic cells as nonspontaneous and spontaneous, respectively?
 Experiment 3.3
Constructing Simple Galvanic Cells
Objectives: To design and construct a simple Galvanic cell.
Materials required: 1.0 M solutions of ZnSO4, 1.0 M solutions of CuSO4,
concentrated KCl solution, zinc and copper strips, electric wires, beakers, a
salt bridge, a tomato or lemon, magnesium ribbon, zinc, iron and aluminium
metals.
Procedure:
1. Put about 150 mL of 1.0 M ZnSO4 solution in one beaker and the same
amount of 1.0 M CuSO4 solution in another beaker. Immerse a zinc strip in
the beaker containing the ZnSO4 solution, and immerse a copper strip in the
copper sulphate solution. Attach electric wires to the electrodes and a voltmeter
as shown in Figure 3.7. Connect the solutions in the two beakers by yarn
(thread used in kerosene stoves). Soak the yarn in concentrated KCl solution.
2. Insert a magnesium ribbon and a copper strip into a raw tomato or lemon.
The two metals should be at least 0.5 cm apart and should not touch each
other. Attach magnesium and copper strips to the negative and positive ends of
a voltmeter, respectively, using electric wires.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
176
3. Repeat the same procedure using metals like Fe, Al, Zn in place of Magnesium
and see which of the metals gives the greatest voltage and which one the least.
Observations and Analysis:
A For the cell in procedure 1
1. What do you observe at each electrode in this cell?
2. What is the direction of electron flow in the external circuit?
3. Which metal serves as the a) anode b) cathode
4. At which electrode does a) oxidation b) reduction occur?
5. Write the a) anode b) cathode and c) cell reaction
B For the cell in procedure 2
1. Do you observe deflection of the pointer in the volt meter?
2. Which of the metals has the greatest voltage and which one the least when
coupled with copper?
3. Is there any relationship between the voltage produced and the reactivity of
the metals?
Write a laboratory report and submit to your teacher.
Secondary Cells
Unlike primary cells, secondary cells are rechargeable. The electrode reactions can be
reversed, and the original reactants can be regenerated. This can be achieved by passing
a direct current through the cell. The process is called charging or recharging.
A secondary cell needs to be recharged when it stops producing electricity. A lead
storage battery is an example of a secondary cell.
A lead Storage Battery is the common automobile battery that usually delivers either 6
or 12 volts, depending on the number of cells used in its construction. The inside of
the battery consists of galvanic cells connected in series. A fully-charged lead-acid cell
is made up of a stack of alternating lead and lead (IV) oxide plates isolated from each
other by porous separators. The individual cells contain a number of lead anodes
connected together, plus a number of cathodes composed of PbO2, also joined
together. These electrodes are immersed in 35% sulphuric acid, which serves as an
electrolyte.
A single lead-storage cell delivers 2 volts. Therefore, a 12 V battery contains six cells
connected in series.
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
177
Figure 3.9 Lead - Storage Battery.
When a lead-storage battery is in operation (on discharge), the following reactions
occur at the electrodes:
Anode reactions: Pb (s) + SO2–
4 (aq) Æ PbSO4 (s) + 2e–
Cathode reactions: PbO2 (s) + 4H+ (aq) + SO2–
4 (aq) + 2e– Æ PbSO4 (s) + 2H2O (l)
and the overall reaction is:
Pb (s) + PbO2 (s) + 4H+ (aq) 2SO2–
4 (aq) Æ 2PbSO4 (s) + 2H2O (l)
From the electrode reactions it can be noticed that PbSO4 is produced at both
electrodes.
Unlike primary cells a lead-storage battery is rechargeable when the battery runs
down. The electrode reactions can be reversed by placing a potential across the
electrodes that is slightly larger than that which the battery can deliver. The reaction
that takes place on recharging a lead storage battery is given by the following
equation.
2PbSO4 (s) + 2H2O (l) Æ Pb (s) + PbO2 (s) + 2H2SO4 (aq)
What are the differences between voltaic cells and electrolytic cells?
Compare and contrast between voltaic and electrolytic cells. List the differences between
voltaic cells and electrolytic cells, and discuss with your classmates.
Activity 3.5
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
178
Exercise 3.4
1. Explain the differences between primary and secondary cells.
2. What substances are used as the anode, cathode and electrolyte in a lead
storage battery?
3. What happens to the concentration of sulphuric acid when a lead storage battery
is on discharge?
4. Write the overall reactions taking place in a lead storage battery when it is
discharging.
3.5 INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS OF ELECTROLYSIS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• describe selected industrial applications of electrolysis;
1. The copper used for the transmission of electric current is supposed to be 100% pure.
What happens if the copper is impure?
2. How many articles in your house are electroplated? Make a list. What is the purpose of
electroplating?
Discuss in groups and share your opinions with your classmates.
Each day, our lives are touched directly or indirectly by the products of electrolysis.
Electrolysis has important industrial applications. It is used for:
a) The production of chemicals like sodium hydroxide, from
electrolysis of brine (concentrated NaCl solution), using
inert electrodes.
The reactions that take place at the electrodes (when graphite electrodes are used)
are as follows:
Anode reaction: 2Cl– (aq) Æ Cl2 (g) + 2e–
Cathode reaction: 2H2O (l) + 2e– Æ H2 (g) + 2OH– (aq)
The overall cell reaction is:
2NaCl (aq) + 2H2O (l) Æ 2Na+ (aq) + 2OH– (aq) + Cl2 (g) + H2 (g)
Activity 3.6
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
179
b) For the production of metals and non-metals.
The non-metals like H2
, Cl2, F2
 etc are manufactured on an industrial scale by the
process called electrolysis. The metal aluminium is extracted industrially by the Hall
Process. This process involves the electrolysis of molten alumina (Al2O3
) mixed with
some amount of cryolite, Na3
AlF6
. The role of cryolite is to reduce the melting point
of alumina from 2000°C to 1000°C. The vessel holding the molten mixture
(Figure 3.8) is made up of iron lined with carbon, which serves as the cathode.
Carbon (graphite) rods that serve as the anode are inserted into the melt. When the
molten mixture is electrolyzed, pure aluminium is produced. The reactions at the
electrodes are:
Anode reaction: ( ) 2– –
2 6O l 3O (g) + 12e → 
Cathode reaction: ( ) 3+ – 4Al l + 12e 4Al(l) →
Overall reaction: 3+ 2– 4Al (l) + 6O (l) 3O (g) + 4Al(l) → 2
Figure 3.10 Production of Aluminium by Hall Process.
c) For the Purification of Metals.
Activity 3.7
For electrolytic and voltaic cells, the cell reaction is the sum of anode and cathode halfreactions. For electrolytic cell used to purify copper, there is no net (overall) reaction.
a Explain why this is so.
b Does this process mean wastage of time, labour and energy? Why? Discuss in groups
and present your opinion o the rest of the class.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
180
Another important application of electrolysis is the purification of metals like copper.
When first separated from its ore, copper metal is about 99% pure with nickel, silver,
gold and platinum as major impurities. In the refining process, the impure copper is
used as the anode, copper metal of high purity used as cathode, and copper sulphate,
CuSO4 solution and aqueous H2SO4 as the electrolyte.
When electrolysis is carried out, copper and impurities that are more easily oxidized
than copper, such as nickel, will go into the solution. Copper passes through the
solution and deposits on the cathode, while the impurities remain in solution. Impurities
like silver and gold are less easily oxidized and do not dissolve but fall away from the
anode as ‘sludge’. The electrode reaction in the purification of copper is the following:
Anode reaction: 2 Cu (s) Cu (aq) 2e → + + −
Cathode reaction: 2 Cu (aq) 2e Cu (s) + − + →
During the process, the size of the impure copper anode decreases and that of the
pure copper cathode increases.
Figure 3.11 Purification of Copper by Electrolysis.
Always remember that, in the purification of metals by electrolysis, the impure metal
should be used as the anode, the pure form of the metal as the cathode and an
electrolyte should contain soluble salt (ions) of the metal to be purified. The process
of purifying metals by electrolysis is called electrorefining.
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
181
d) Electroplating
Activity 3.8
When zinc electrode is dipped in copper sulphate solution, part of the electrode in the
solution will be covered with a reddish brown layer of copper. Can this process be
considered as electroplating? Explain. Discuss in groups and present your opinion to the
class.
What is the purpose of electroplating?
Electroplating is a process of covering the surface of a metal (metal article) with a
thin layer of another metal. Using this process, metals that easily corrode can be
protected by a thin coating of another metal that resists corrosion. For example, tin
cans are steel cans with a thin coating of tin, and chrome-plated bumpers are used for
automobiles. Thus, the main objective of electroplating is to protect an article from
corrosion and to give articles a beautiful appearance. In the process of electroplating,
the pure plating metal should be used as the anode, the article (metal) to be plated
the as cathode and a solution containing ions of the plating metal as the electrolyte.
For example, to produce a silver-plated copper article, say, a medal, one should
use silver as the anode, the copper medal as the cathode and silver nitrate solution as
the electrolyte (Figure 3.12).
Silver (Anode) Copper medal
(Cathode)
AgNO3 solution
D.C. source
Figure 3.12 Electroplating Copper medal with Silver.
The reactions that occur at the electrodes during electroplating are:
Anode reaction: + Ag (s) Ag (aq) + 1e− →
Cathode reaction: + – Ag (aq) + 1e Ag (s) →
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
182
Unit Summary
• Electrochemistry is a field of chemistry that studies how chemical reactions
produce electricity and how electricity is used to bring about chemical
reactions in electrochemical cells.
• Electrochemistry deals with the relationship that exists between chemical
energy and electrical energy.
• Electrochemical cells include electrolytic cells and Galvanic (voltaic) cells.
• Electrical conductivity is the ability of substances to conduct electricity.
• Metallic conductivity is the flow of electricity through metals, and the
conduction of electricity through metals is due to the presence of freely
moving (delocalized) valence electrons.
• Electrolytes are substances that conduct electricity, either in an aqueous
solution or in a molten state.
• The conduction of electricity through electrolytes is due to the movement
of anions and cations towards electrodes of opposite charge, and the chargecarriers in electrolytic conduction are ions.
• Electrolysis is a process in which electricity is used to bring about an
oxidation- reduction reaction in an electrolytic cell.
• Electrolysis is also the process of decomposition of an electrolyte, using
electrical energy.
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• anode
• cathode
• conductivity apparatus
• Daniel cell
• electrical conductivity
• electrochemical cell
• electrochemistry
• electrode
• electrolysis
• electrolyte
• electrolytic cell
• electroplating
• electrorefining
• half - cell
• half - reaction
• hall process
• primary cell
• salt bridge
• secondary cell
• voltaic (galvanic) cell
ELECTROCHEMISTRY (UNIT 3)
183
• Electrodes are either metal strips or graphite rods.
• An anode is the electrode attached to the positive terminal of a direct
current source, at which oxidation (loss of electrons) by anions occurs, and
electrons leave the cell.
• A cathode is the electrode attached to the negative terminal of a dc source,
the negative electrode at which reduction (gain of electrons) of cations
occurs and electrons enter the cell (electric current enters the electrolyte).
• During electrolysis, anions move to the anode and cations move to the
cathode.
• The reaction taking place at each electrode (cathode or anode) is said to
be a half-cell reaction.
• Cell reaction is the reaction that takes place in the entire cell.
• Voltaic (Galvanic) cells are electrochemical cells in which a spontaneous
redox reaction generates electricity. They convert chemical energy into
electrical energy.
• Primary cells are voltaic cells that are not rechargeable, and the reactions
taking place in them are irreversible.
• Secondary cells are voltaic cells that are rechargeable since the reactions
taking place in them are reversible.
• Unlike electrolytic cells, the anode is negative and the cathode is positive
in voltaic cells.
• Electrolysis has important industrial applications such as in the production
of chemicals like NaOH, in the production of non-metals like Cl2 and H2,
metals like Na, Al and in purification of metals and electroplating