A chemical industry is an institution involved in the production of chemical products. The
chemical industry involves the use of chemical processes such as chemical reactions and
refining methods to produce a wide variety of materials with desirable properties and
quality to satisfy social needs. Most of these products, in turn, can be used by other
chemical industries to manufacture other items or can be used directly by consumers.
Generally, chemical industries:
• use naturally-available raw materials to produce the desired products,
• involve chemical reactions to transform raw materials into finished and semi-finished
products,
• consume relatively large quantities of energy during the manufacturing process,
• use safe operation methods in their manufacturing processes, and
Activity 4.1
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
190
• test their products during and after manufacture in their quality control laboratories
to ensure that the products meet the required specifications.
4.2 NATURAL RESOURCES AND INDUSTRY
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define natural resources;
• list natural resources;
• classify natural resources as renewable and non-renewable;
• define the chemical industry as a firm that involves the taking of raw materials from
the environment and turning them into usable products by chemical means;
• describe the applications of minerals in industry.
1. Can fossil fuels be renewed?
2. How can animals and plants be replaced once they die?
3. What are natural resources?
4. Explain the importance of natural resources for chemical industries with examples.
Discuss in group and present your opinion to the class.
Natural resources can be classified as renewable and non-renewable resources. Renewable
resources are resources that can be replenished (replaced) by natural processes. These
resources can be renewed at the same rate at which they are used. Plants, animals, soil and
water are examples of renewable resources. Non-renewable resources are resources that
are found in a fixed amount in nature and cannot be replenished. These resources can be
completely used up within some decades and cannot be replaced easily. Examples of nonrenewable resources include natural gas, and coal. Generally, any chemical industry utilizes
either natural resource as starting materials, or other substances obtained from natural resources
after processing, as a raw material, for its manufacturing activity.
Exercise 4.1
Classify the following natural resources as renewable and non-renewable:
a petroleum b minerals c fire wood
d biomass e plants f coal
Activity 4.2
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
191
4.3 PRODUCTION OF SOME IMPORTANT METALS AND
NON-METALS
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• outline the extraction of aluminium by the Hall process;
• describe the main physical and chemical properties of aluminium;
• describe the uses of aluminium;
• outline the extraction of iron by the blast furnace;
• briefly describe the conversion of pig iron in steel;
• describe wrought iron;
• describe the main chemical properties of iron;
• describe the uses of iron;
• outline the extraction of copper;
• describe the main chemical properties of copper;
• describe the uses of copper;
• outline the production of nitrogen;
• describe the main chemical properties of nitrogen;
• outline the production of phosphorus;
• describe the main chemical properties of phosphorus;
• outline the production of oxygen;
• describe the main chemical properties of oxygen;
• outline the production of sulphur;
• describe the main chemical properties of sulphur;
• outline the production of chlorine; and
• describe the chemical properties of chlorine.
Discuss the following issues in groups:
1. Steel-cored aluminium cables are used for conducting high-voltage electricity over
long distances.
i) Give two reasons why aluminium is used for these cables.
ii) What is the purpose of the steel core?
Activity 4.3
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
192
2. Can you mention materials, in your home or outside, that are made of aluminium?
What are their properties for example weight, rusting, shape etc?
Discuss in groups and give presentation to the class.
4.3.1 Production of Some Important Metals
A. Aluminium
Occurrence and extraction
Aluminium is the most abundant metal and the third most plentiful element after oxygen and
silicon in the earth’s crust. About seven percent of the earth’s crust is aluminium. It is the
second-most important metal, after iron, in terms of consumption. Aluminium does not
occur as a free metal in nature. Its principal ore is bauxite (Al2
O3
.2H2
O). Other minerals
containing aluminium are orthoclase (KAlSi3
O8
), cryolite (Na3
AlF6
), corundum (Al2
O3
),
beryl (Be3
Al2
Si6
O8
) and china clay (Al2
Si2
O7
.2H2
O).
Aluminium is extracted industrially principally, from bauxite, Al2
O3
•2H2
O, by the Hall–
Héroult process or simply the Hall process. In this process, first the bauxite needs to be
purified since it is frequently contaminated with silica (SiO2
), iron oxides and titanium (IV)
oxide. To isolate pure Al2
O3
 from bauxite, the powdered ore is first heated with sodium
hydroxide solution to convert silica into a soluble silicate.
SiO2 (s) + 2NaOH (aq) Æ Na2
SiO3 (aq) + H2
O (l)
At the same time aluminium oxide is converted to soluble sodium aluminate.
Al2
O3 (s) + 2NaOH (aq) Æ NaAlO2 (aq) + H2
O (l)
The impurities like iron oxides and titanium (IV) oxide remain unaffected by the base and
are filtered off. Why are they not affected?
Then the solution is treated with acid to precipitate aluminium hydroxide.
AlO2
– (aq) + H3
O+ (aq) Æ Al(OH)3 (s)
Aluminium hydroxide is collected by filtration, washed, dried, and then heated strongly in
a furnace to get Al2
O3
.
2Al(OH)3
 heat → Al2
O3
 + 3H2
O
Pure aluminium oxide is mixed with some cryolite, Na3
AlF6
, and then melted. Cryolite is
added to Al2
O3
 to reduce its melting point from 2045o
C to 1000o
C. The molten mixture is
then electrolyzed to obtain aluminium. The electrolytic cell, in which the molten mass is
electrolyzed, contains graphite electrodes as both anode and cathode.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
193
1. Write the balanced chemical equation for the dissociation of aluminium oxide in the
molten state.
2. Identify the ions that move to the cathode and the anode during the electrolysis of
molten aluminium oxide? Write the half-reactions at the anode, cathode and overall
cell reactions.
3. At which electrode will aluminium be produced during the process?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Power
Solid charge
Molten electrolyte
Bubbles of CO2
Molten Al
Graphite furnace
lining (cathode)
Graphite rods (Anodes)
Figure 4.1 Electrolytic cell for aluminium production
Al2
O3
 is converted to Al, by electrolysis. We do not use reducing agents for reduction
of aluminium from aluminium oxide; why?
Physical Properties: Aluminium is a soft silvery-white metal having a density of 2.7
g/cm3
. It melts at 660°C..
 It can be shaped into wires, rolled, pressed or cast into different
shapes. It is a good conductor of heat and electricity.
Chemical Properties: Aluminium is a reactive metal, even though its reactions are not
vigorous in comparison with those of sodium, potassium, calcium and other metals of
group IA and IIA. It undergoes the following reactions:
a Reaction with Oxygen:
Aluminium has affinity for oxygen and reacts with atmospheric oxygen to form a thin
film of aluminium oxide on its surface.
4Al (s) + 3O2 (g) Æ 2Al2
O3 (s)
Activity 4.4
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
194
This thin film of oxide inhibits further reaction with oxygen. The thin film can be
removed by rubbing with mercury or mercury (II) chloride solution.
What type of oxide is Al2
O3
?
b Reaction with dilute acids:
Aluminium reacts with dilute acids like HCl and H2
SO4
, forming salts and liberating
hydrogen gas.
2Al (s) + 3H2
SO4 (aq) Æ Al2
(SO4
)3 (aq) + 3H2 (g)
2Al (s) + 6HCl (aq) Æ 2AlCl3 (s) + 3H2 (g)
Aluminium does not react with dilute or concentrated HNO3
 due to the formation of
a protective oxide layer on its surface.
c Aluminium burns in chlorine gas to form aluminium chloride:
2Al (s) + 3Cl2 (g) Æ 2AlCl3 (s)
d Aluminium reacts with sodium hydroxide solution:
2Al (s) + 2NaOH (aq) + 6H2
O (l) Æ 2NaAl(OH)4 (aq) + 3H2 (g)
Uses: Aluminium is lightweight and corrosion resistant, so it is used to make light alloys
like duralumin (mixture of Al, Cu and Mg). Alloys of aluminium are extensively used in the
transport industry to make aircraft, ships and cars. It is used in the manufacture of household
cooking utensils due to its high thermal conductivity and resistance to corrosion. It is also
used to make door and window frames and roofing for buildings, as packaging material in
food industries, and for electrical transmission lines.
In the thermite welding process, powdered aluminium when mixed with iron (III) oxide
and ignited, produces a temperature of about 3000°C. This temperature is quite sufficient
for welding metals. The reaction in this process is as follows:
2Al (s) + Fe2
O3 (s) Æ 2Fe (l) + Al2
O3 (s)
The mixture of powdered aluminium and iron oxide is called thermite.
Research and writing
1. Make a list of materials made of aluminium you encounter at home, and in the city
or town where you live.
2. What property of aluminium makes it useful in the construction industries?
3. Regarding the manufacturing of aluminium by electrolysis, answer the following
questions.
a The electrolyte does not need heating to keep it in its molten state; why?
b The graphite anode gradually disappear during the electrolysis. What is it turning
into? (Think about the product that is given off at the anode).
Present your findings to the class.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
195
1. Iron is the cheapest among all metals. Give reasons for this.
2. What is the difference between stainless steel and iron?
3. What do you understand by the term alloy? Is stainless steel an alloy?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
B. Iron
Occurrence and Extraction
Iron is the second-most abundant metal next to aluminium, in the earth’s crust and it is the
fourth most abundant element. It constitutes about 4.7% of the earth’s crust by weight. It
is never found as a free metal in nature. It occurs in nature only in the form of compounds,
such as oxides, carbonates and sulphides. The chief ores of iron are hematite (Fe2
O3
),
limonite (Fe2
O3
.H2
O), magnetite (Fe3
O4
), and siderite (FeCO3
). It is also found in the
form of iron pyrites (FeS2
) which is commonly called fool’s gold.
Iron is generally extracted from hematite (Fe2
O3
), magnetite (Fe3
O4
) and siderite (FeCO3
).
The extraction of iron from its ores is carried out in a blast furnace. The raw materials for
the extraction of iron are iron ore, coke, limestone and hot air. The furnace is charged with
a mixture of iron ore, limestone and coke at the top and a blast of hot air is blown in at the
bottom. The coke burns to form carbon dioxide and the temperature approaches 2000°C
near the bottom. As the carbon dioxide rises up, the coke reduces it to carbon monoxide.
The carbon monoxide then reduces the iron oxide to iron metal. The overall reactions in
the blast furnace can be summarized as follows:
1. Oxidation of coke to carbon dioxide:
C (s) + O2 (g) Æ CO2 (g) + heat
2. Reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide:
CO2 (g) + C (s) Æ 2CO (g)
3. Reduction of iron oxides to metallic iron by carbon monoxide:
3Fe2
O3 (s) + CO (g) Æ 2Fe3
O4 (s) + CO2 (g)
Fe3
O4 (s) + CO (g) Æ 3FeO (s) + CO2 (g)
FeO (s) + CO (g) Æ Fe (l) + CO2 (g)
4. Decomposition of the limestone by heat in the blast furnace serves as a flux to
remove impurities:
Activity 4.5
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
196
CaCO3 (s) heat → CaO (s) + CO2 (g)
5. Reaction of calcium oxide with impurities like silica (SiO2
) to form calcium silicate
which is a glass-like material called slag.
CaO + SiO2 Æ CaSiO3
The molten iron flows to the bottom of the blast furnace. The slag is less dense and floats
on the surface of the molten iron. Thus, the molten iron and the molten slag are tapped off
separately. The slag is used mostly for the manufacture of cement
Figure 4.2 Blast furnace.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
197
The iron obtained directly from the blast furnace is called pig iron. It is impure and contains
about 2% silicon, up to 1% phosphorus and manganese, and traces of sulphur. These
impurities make pig iron brittle. When pig iron is re-melted with scrap iron and cast into
moulds, it forms cast iron.
Wrought iron: is the purest form of commercial iron. It is obtained by removing most of
the impurities from pig iron. It is manufactured by heating impure iron with hematite and
limestone in a furnace. This increases the purity of the iron to 99.5%. Wrought iron is a
tough, malleable and ductile form of iron.
PROJECT 4.1
Form a group and construct a model of the blast furnace from locally available
materials.
Conversion of Pig Iron to Steel
The relatively high carbon-content of the iron recovered from the blast furnace (pig iron)
makes it very hard and brittle. The conversion of pig iron to steel is essentially a purification
process in which impurities are removed by oxidation. This purification process is carried
out in a furnace at high temperatures. In the conversion of pig iron to steel, three different
methods are used. These are the Bessemer Converter, Open-hearth Furnace and the
Basic Oxygen Process.
a The Bessemer Converter: In the process of converting pig iron to steel, molten
pig iron from the blast furnace is transferred to a cylindrical vessel containing a
refractory lining of MgCO3
 and CaCO3
. A blast of hot air is blown through the
molten metal from a set of small holes at the bottom of the vessel. The oxygen
passing through the molten metal converts silicon, phosphorus and sulphur to their
oxides, which then react with the lining to form a slag. The carbon in the pig iron is
also oxidized to carbon monoxide, so its concentration is also reduced. The
conversion of the pig iron to steel by this process requires only 15 minutes. However,
the reaction is difficult to control and the quality of the steel produced can be quite
variable.
b The Open-hearth Furnace: It has a large, shallow hearth, which is usually lined
with a basic oxide refractory (MgO and CaO). The furnace is charged with a mixture
of pig iron, Fe2
O3
, scrap iron and limestone. A blast of hot air and burning fuel is
directed over the surface of the charge to maintain it in the molten state. Impurities in
the pig iron are oxidized by the Fe2
O3
 and air. Carbon dioxide, and sulphur dioxide
formed by the oxidation of the carbon and sulphur, respectively, in the pig iron
bubble out of the mixture as waste gases.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
198
The SiO2
 and other acidic oxides like P4
O10 combine with CaO (from limestone) and the
refractory lining to form a slag.
The impurities in pig iron are oxidized in the following way:
C +O2 Æ CO2
S +O2 Æ SO2
12P + 10Fe2
O3 Æ 3P4
O10 + 20Fe
3Si + 2Fe2
O3 Æ 3SiO2 + 4Fe
Calcium oxide, formed by the decomposition of limestone, reacts with oxides of silicon
and phosphorus to form slag.
P4
O10 + 6CaO Æ 2Ca3
(PO4
)2
SiO2 + CaO Æ CaSiO3
This entire process takes 8 to 10 hours to complete and the quality of the steel is much
more easily controlled. A calculated amount of various elements can be added to the steel
to form steel alloys with desired properties.
Figure 4.3 a) Bessemer converter b) Open-hearth furnace.
a
b
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
199
c Basic Oxygen Process: This newer procedure has largely replaced the open
hearth, because of its high speed. It involves forcing a mixture of powdered
calcium oxide, CaO, and oxygen gas directly into the surface of the molten
pig iron. The oxygen reacts exothermically with carbon, sulphur, silicon,
phosphorus and impurity metals. Carbon and sulphur are oxidized to CO2
 and
SO2
, respectively, and are released as exhaust gases. The oxides of silicon
(SiO2
), phosphorus, (P4
O10) and impurity metals combine with lime (CaO),
forming slag. The charge in the converter is maintained in the molten state by
the energy released in these oxidation reactions. The converter is tilted to
remove the slag. After a second blow of oxygen, the converter is tilted once
again and the molten steel is poured out. This process takes only about 20
to 25 minutes.
Figure 4.4 The basic oxygen converter.
Prepare a list of materials which are made of steel and describe their uses. Discuss in
groups and give a presentation to the class.
Activity 4.6
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
200
Physical Properties of Iron
Do you remember physical properties of iron? Can you mention some of them?
Iron is a grey, lustrous, malleable and ductile metal. It is a good conductor of heat and
electricity. It has a high melting point (1580°C) and a high density (7.87 g/cm3
). It is a
ferromagnetic metal, which means it can be permanently magnetized.
Chemical Properties of Iron
Have you ever noticed the formation of a reddish thin film on the surface of an
iron object? Do you know the chemical nature of this thin film? From your
observations, what do you conclude about the reactivity of iron?
Iron is a reactive metal. Its reactivity is very slow, compared to group IA and IIA metals.
Iron rusts in the presence of air and moisture to form hydrated iron (III) oxide.
4Fe (s) + 3O2 (g) moisture → 2Fe2
O3
 .x H2
O(s) (rust)
Iron reacts with dilute acids, like HCl and H2
SO4
, forming iron (II) salts and liberating
hydrogen gas.
Fe (s) + 2HCl (aq) Æ FeCl2 (aq) + H2 (g)
Fe (s) + H2
SO4 (aq) Æ FeSO4 (aq) + H2 (g)
Like other transition metals, iron also exhibits different oxidation states. It commonly exists
as the ferrous (Fe2+) and ferric (Fe+3) ions. Iron (II) and iron (III) compounds are coloured.
Aqueous solutions of iron (II) compounds are pale-green and solutions of iron (III)
compounds are yellowish brown.
Aqueous solutions of some iron (II) compounds are rapidly oxidized to the corresponding
iron (III) compounds. For example, iron (II) hydroxide, Fe(OH)2
, on exposure to air,
oxidizes to iron (III) hydroxide.
4Fe(OH)2 (s) + O2 (g) + 2H2
O (l) Æ 4Fe(OH)3 (s)
Heated iron reacts with hydrogen chloride gas, forming iron (II) chloride and hydrogen gas.
Fe (s) + 2HCl (g) Æ FeCl2 (g) + H2 (g)
Heated iron reacts with chlorine and sulphur to form the chloride and sulphide, respectively.
2Fe (s) + 3Cl2 (g) Æ 2FeCl3 (s)
Fe (s) + S (s) Æ FeS (s)
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
201
Iron has the ability to displace less active metals from solutions of their salts. For example,
when a piece of iron is placed in a solution of CuSO4
, it is oxidized to Fe2+ and a reddish
brown deposit of copper metal forms on the surface of the iron.
Fe (s) + Cu2+ (aq) Æ Fe2+ (aq) + Cu (s)
Uses of Iron
Iron is the most widely used metal and takes first position in worldwide consumption. It is
used as a structural metal in the construction of buildings and bridges. In the form of pig
iron, it is used to make domestic boilers, hot-water radiators, railings, water pipes, castings,
and mouldings. As wrought iron, it is used in making nails, sheets, horseshoes, ornamental
gates, door knockers, farm machinery etc. Iron is also used in the manufacture of alloys
such as carbon steels and alloy steels. Carbon steels can be classified as mild steel, medium
steel and high-carbon steel, based on the amount of carbon.
Mild Steel: contains up to 0.2% carbon and is used in making screws, motors, car batteries,
railway lines, ships, bridges, nuts and bolts.
Medium Steel: contains 0.3–0.6% carbon and is used to make springs and chains.
High-Carbon Steel: contains 0.6–1.5% carbon and is used to make drill bits, knives,
hammers and chisels.
Alloy Steel: contains iron and a relatively higher percentage of other metals. For example,
stainless steel contains chromium (14–18%) and nickel (7–9%). Tool steels include tungsten
steel and manganese steel. These metals give the alloy hardness, toughness and heat
resistance. They are used in rock drills, cutting edges and parts of machinery that are
subjected to heavy wear.
1. You have learned about the purification of metals, including copper in unit 3. Describe
the electrolytic process used for the purification copper metal.
2. Prepare a list of items made of copper.
3. In the refining process of copper, zinc does not deposit on the cathode. Why?
Discuss in your group and give a presentation to the class.
Activity 4.7
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
202
C. Copper
Occurrence and extraction
Copperis occasionally found as native copper. However, it is found mainly in compounds
such as sulphides, oxides and the carbonates. The most important sulphide ores are
chalcopyrite (CuFeS2
), chalcocite (Cu2
S), covellite (CuS) and bornite (Cu5
FeS4
). The
principal oxide ores are cuprite (Cu2
O) and tenorite (CuO). In the carbonate form, it
exists as malachite (CuCO3
.Cu(OH)2
).
Copper is principally extracted from chalcopyrite. Since the amount of copper in the ore is
very small, the crushed and ground sulphide ore is first concentrated by froth flotation. This
treatment changes the concentration of the ore from 2 % copper to as high as 30% copper.
The concentrated ore is then roasted with a limited supply of air (oxygen).
2CuFeS2 (s) + 4O2 (g) Æ Cu2
S (s) + 2FeO (s) + 3SO2 (g)
The roasted mixture is smelted by adding limestone and sand to form a molten slag that
removes many of the impurities. FeO present in the roasted mixture can also be removed
as slag in the form of iron silicate (FeSiO3
), and silica in the form of calcium silicate (CaSiO3
).
CaCO3 (s) + SiO2 (s) Æ CaSiO3
 (l) + CO2 (g)
FeO (s) + SiO2 (s) Æ FeSiO3 (l)
The Cu2
S obtained by roasting chalcopyrite is then reduced by heating it in a limited supply
of oxygen.
Cu2
S (s) + O2 (g) Æ 2Cu (l) + SO2 (g)
The copper produced by the above process is called blister copper and it has 98.5 – 99.5
% purity. Blister copper contains iron, silver, gold and sometimes zinc as impurities. So it is
refined further by electrolysis as shown in Figure 4.5. Copper obtained by electrolytic
refining is 99.99% pure.
Figure 4.5 Electrolytic refining of copper.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
203
Physical Properties of Copper
Copper is a soft, ductile, malleable, reddish-brown metal with a density of 8.96 g/cm3
. It
is second to silver in electrical conductivity. It melts at 1086°C and boils at 2310°C.
Chemical properties of copper
Copper is less reactive metal, that is why it is found in the native state. Although it is not
very reactive, it undergoes the following reactions:
Powdered copper, when heated in air forms a black powder of copper (II) oxide, CuO.
2Cu (s) + O2 (g) Æ 2CuO (s)
Copper does not react with dilute acids like HCl and H2
SO4
. It cannot displace hydrogen
from acids. However, it can be oxidized by oxidizing acids such as dilute and concentrated
nitric acid and hot concentrated sulphuric acid, H2
SO4
.
3Cu (s) + 8HNO3 (aq) dilute → 3Cu(NO3
)
2 (aq) + 2NO (g) + 4H2
O (l)
Cu (s) + 4HNO3 (aq) concentrated → Cu(NO3
)2 (aq) + 2NO2 (g) + 2H2
O (l)
Cu (s) + 2H2
SO4 (aq) Hot and concentrated → CuSO4 (aq) + 2SO2 (g) + 2H2
O (l)
Copper corrodes in moist air over a long period of time as a result of oxidation caused by
a mixture of water, oxygen and carbon dioxide. It turns green, due to the formation of
verdigris: a basic copper carbonate (CuCO3
.Cu(OH)2
) or Cu2
(OH)2
CO3
.
2Cu (s) + H2
O (l) + O2 (g) + CO2 (g) Æ CuCO3
.Cu(OH)2
Basic copper carbonate is responsible for the green layer that forms on the surface of
copper and bronze objects. This layer adheres to the surface and protects the metal from
further corrosion.
Copper is a transition metal and exhibits different oxidation states. It exists as cuprous
(Cu+
) and cupric (Cu2+) ions. Compounds containing copper in the +1 oxidation state are
stable in insoluble compounds. Cu1+ is unstable and cannot exist in aqueous solution since
it reduces and oxidizes (disproportionates) itself as follows:
2Cu+ (aq) Æ Cu2+ (aq) + Cu (s)
Soluble compounds containing Cu+
, such as CuCl, CuI and CuBr, are all colourless solids.
The most stable oxidation state of copper is +2. Aqueous solutions of many copper (II)
compounds are blue, thus copper forms coloured compounds in the oxidation state of +2.
For example, hydrated copper sulphate, CuSO4
.5H2
O, consists of blue crystals, and its
aqueous solution is also blue.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
204
Uses of Copper
Copper is used to manufacture alloys. For example, bronze is an alloy of copper and tin,
and it is used to make coins, medals, bells, machinery parts, etc. Brass is an alloy of
copper and zinc, and it is used for hardware tops, terminals and pipes. Copper is widely
used in the electrical industry in the form of electric wires, cables etc. Copper compounds,
such as copper chloride, copper carbonate and copper hydroxide, are used as pesticides.
Exercise 4.2
1. Describe the occurrence and extraction of the following metals; aluminium, iron,
and copper.
2. Which of the three metals, Al, Fe and Cu is produced by electrochemical reduction?
3. Explain how Al, Fe and Cu behave in dry air, moisture and acidic solutions.
4. Suggest the main chemical reactions involved in the conversion of pig iron to wrought
iron.
5. Discuss the main areas of applications of Al, Fe and Cu in home and industry.
Activity 4.8
1. Draw the structure of a nitrogen molecule. How many bonds are present in it? Why
does nitrogen form triple bond?
2. Which form of nitrogen is absorbed by green plants?
Discuss in group and give a presentation to the class.
4.3.2 Production of Some Important Non-metals
A. Nitrogen
Occurrence and Production
Nitrogen occurs in nature in the elemental form. It also exists in the form of compounds. In
the elemental state, it exists as a diatomic molecule, N2
, in atmospheric air. It constitutes
about 80% by volume of the atmosphere. In the form of compounds, it exists as sodium
nitrate (Chile salt peter, NaNO3
) and potassium nitrate (KNO3
) also called saltpetre. It is
also found in DNA molecules and proteins of all living things.
In the industrial production of nitrogen, the first step is to remove impurities like dust and
other particles from air. The air is then compressed under high pressure and low temperature
to remove carbon dioxide and water vapour since they solidify at a relatively high
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
205
temperatures compared to nitrogen and oxygen. As the temperature continues to decrease,
the air containing mainly nitrogen and oxygen condenses to give a pale-blue liquid. Nitrogen
is thus separated on an industrial scale by fractional distillation of liquid air. When liquid air
is fractionally distilled, nitrogen is collected and stored in steel cylinders under pressure.
The second fraction consists of argon, which distils off the mixture at –186°C, leaving
behind a blue liquid of oxygen that boils at –183°C.
In the laboratory, nitrogen is prepared by warming an aqueous solution containing ammonium
chloride and sodium nitrite.
NH4
Cl (aq) + NaNO2 (aq) Æ NaCl (aq) + N2 (g) + 2H2
O (l)
Physical Properties of Nitrogen
Nitrogen is colourless, odourless and tasteless gas. It is inert under ordinary conditions, and
that is why it is found in atmospheric air as N2
. The inertness of nitrogen at low temperatures
is directly related to the strength of the triple bond, which requires high energy to break.
Chemical Properties of Nitrogen
Is nitrogen a reactive or unreactive non-metal? Can you suggest a proof for your
answer?
However, nitrogen reacts with metals of group IA and IIA as well as oxygen at higher
temperatures. When heated with reactive metals like lithium, calcium and magnesium, it
forms compounds, known as nitrides.
6Li (s) + N2 (g) Æ 2Li3
N (s)
3Ca (s) + N2 (g) Æ Ca3
N2 (s)
3Mg (s) + N2 (g) Æ Mg3
N2 (s)
Nitrogen combines with oxygen at elevated temperatures or in an electric arc to form
oxides.
N2 (g) + O2 (g) Æ 2NO (g)
N2 (g) + 2O2 (g) Æ 2NO2 (g)
Nitric oxide, also called nitrogen monoxide, NO, is a colourless and reactive gas. It forms
nitrogen dioxide (NO2
), a reddish brown gas, when it comes into contact with oxygen.
2NO (g) + O2 (g) Æ 2NO2 (g)
This reddish brown gas dimerizes at low temperatures to give a colourless gas of dinitrogen
tetraoxide, N2
O4
.
2NO2 (g) Æ N2
O4 (g)
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
206
Nitrogen also forms oxides, like dinitrogen monoxide, N2
O, (commonly called laughing
gas), dinitrogen trioxide (N2
O3
) and dinitrogen pentoxide (N2
O5
).
Nitrogen reacts directly with hydrogen in the Haber processto form ammonia. In this
process, a mixture of N2
 and H2
 gas, at a pressure of 200-300 atm and a temperature of
400-600°C, is passed over a catalyst of finely divided iron.
N2 (g) + 3H2 (g) 400–600°C ← Fe/200–300atm
→ 2NH3 (g)
The ammonia produced by this method is primarily used in the manufacture of fertilizers. It
is also used for the production of nitric acid (HNO3
).
Uses of Nitrogen
Nitrogen is used in food packaging to prevent oxidation, and to create an inert atmosphere
in the production of semiconductors. Liquid nitrogen is used as a refrigerant to preserve
bulls’ semen and blood. Its major use is in the production of ammonia.
Have you ever observed glowing worms? Why do they glow? Anyone who has observed
them should explain to the class.
B. Phosphorus
Occurrence and Extraction
Does phosphorus exist in the pure form (elemental state) as does nitrogen? If not,
why? Phosphorus is a relatively abundant element, ranking 12th in the earth’s crust. It
exists naturally only in the combined state, such as in rock phosphate, Ca3
(PO4
)2
,
fluoroapatite, Ca10(PO4
)6
F2 or 3Ca3 (PO4
)
2
.CaF2
. It is also found in teeth, bones and
DNA.
What is allotropy? What are the two common allotropes of phosphorus?
Allotropes are different forms of the same element with the same physical state but with
different physical properties. This is due to the difference in the arrangement of atoms.
The two common allotropic forms of phosphorus are white phosphorus and red phosphorus.
White phosphorus is a very poisonous, white waxy-looking substance that melts at 44.1°C
and boils at 287°C. Its density is 1.8 g/cm3
. It consists of individual tetra-atomic (P4
)
molecules and is an unstable form of phosphorus.
Activity 4.9
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
207
Red phosphorus is denser (2.16 g/cm3
) and is much less reactive than white phosphorus at
normal temperatures. It consists of P4
 molecules linked together to form a polymer (large
molecule) as shown below.
Industrially, white phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of crushed rock
phosphate, Ca3
(PO4
)2
, silica, SiO2
, and coke in an electric furnace. The reaction in the
furnace is:
2Ca3
(PO4
)
2 (s) + 6SiO2 (s) + 10C (s) Æ 6CaSiO3 (l) + P4 (g) + 10CO (g)
The vaporized phosphorus (P4
) is condensed, collected and stored under water. Red
phosphorus is prepared by heating white phosphorus in sunlight for several days. White
phosphorus is stored under water because it spontaneously ignites (bursts into flames) in
the presence of oxygen. Red phosphorus is much less reactive than white phosphorus and
does not need to be stored under water.
Physical Properties of Phosphorus
Use reference books available in your school library and write down the main properties
of white and red phosphorus.
Chemical Properties of Phosphorus
Phosphorus exhibits the following common chemical reactions. Phosphorus reacts with
limited and excess supplies of oxygen to form tetraphosphorus hexoxide (P4
O6
) and
tetraphosphorus decoxide (P4
O10) respectively.
P4 (s) + 3O2 (g) Æ P4
O6 (s)
P4 (s) + 5O2 (g) Æ P4
O10 (s)
P4
O6
 and P4
O10 dissolve in water to form phosphorous acid, H3
PO3
, an orthophsophoric
acid, H3
PO4
 respectively.
P4
O6 (s) + 6H2
O (l) Æ 4H3
PO3 (aq)
P4
O10 (s) + 6H2
O (l) Æ 4H3
PO4 (aq)
Activity 4.10
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
208
Phosphorus also reacts with limited and excess supplies of chlorine to form phosphorus
(III) chloride (PCl3
) and phosphorus (V) chloride (PCl5
) respectively.
P4 (s) + 6Cl2 (g) Æ 4PCl3 (s)
P4 (s) + 10Cl2 (g) Æ 4PCl5 (s)
Activity 4.11
1. Write the chemical reactions for photosynthesis and respiration. What are the products
formed in photosynthesis and respiration?
2. What are the uses of oxygen in hospitals?
3. How do astronauts breathe while in space?
Discuss all the above points in groups and give a presentation to the class.
C. Oxygen
Occurrence and Production
Oxygen is the most abundant element on earth. It constitutes about 46.6% by weight of the
earth’s crust in the form of compounds such as oxides, silicates, carbonates, phosphates
etc. It exists in nature in the elemental state in atmospheric air constituting about 20% by
volume. Oxygen is manufactured industrially by the fractional distillation of liquid air in a
way similar to that of nitrogen.
Chemical Properties of Oxygen
Oxygen is relatively reactive and combines directly with most elements to form oxides.
Oxygen combines with metal to form metal oxides (basic oxides). For example,
2Mg (s) + O2 (g) Æ 2MgO (s)
2Ca (s) + O2 (s) Æ 2CaO (s)
Oxygen combines with non-metals to form acidic oxides; for example:
S8 (s) + 8O2 (g) Æ 8SO2 (g)
P4 (s) + 5O2 (g) Æ P4O10 (g)
Oxygen supports combustion and is necessary for the burning of substances like charcoal,
hydrocarbon fuel, etc.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
209
C (s) + O2 (g) Æ CO2 (g)
CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g) Æ CO2 (g) + 2H2O (g)
Activity 4.12
Have you observed the colour of sulphur? What is the use of sulphur in your area?
D. Sulphur
Occurrence and Extraction
Sulphur is found in nature and in the form of compounds such as galena (PbS), pyrites
(FeS2
) (fool’s gold ), cinnabar (HgS), sphalerite (ZnS), gypsum (CaSO4
.2H2
O), barite
(BaSO4
), and as hydrogen sulphide (H2
S) in natural gas and crude oil.
Sulphur is extracted from underground deposits of elemental sulphur by the Frasch process
(Figure 4.6). In this process, three concentric pipes are sent down to the sulphur deposit.
Superheated water at about 170o
C is pumped through the outermost pipes. Hot air is
compressed in the innermost tube. A froth of sulphur, air and water come out to the surface
of the earth forced by hot compressed air in the middle tube. The molten sulphur is then
cooled and solidified.
Figure 4.6 Frasch Process for the production of sulphur.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
210
Uses: Nearly one-half of the sulphur needed by chemical industries is obtained as a waste
product of other industrial processes. For example, sulphur can be obtained in the form of
hydrogen sulphide (H2
S) from natural gas and during the purification of crude oil. It can
also be obtained in the form of sulphur dioxide from the roasting of sulphide ores during the
manufacture of metals. The use of sulphur obtained from waste products of other industries
reduces the demand for the element from natural deposits. This also reduces the pollution
of atmospheric air and the formation of acid rain.
Sulphur exhibits allotropy. The most important allotropes of sulphur are rhombic and
monoclinic sulphur. Rhombic sulphur is the most stable form of sulphur consisting of S8
molecules.
Chemical Properties of Sulphur
Sulphur is relatively stable and unreactive at room temperature. However, it reacts with
metals and non-metals when heated.
Sulphur combines with metals when heated to form sulphides.
8Fe (s) + S8 (s) Æ 8FeS (s)
Sulphur burns in oxygen to form oxides.
S8 (s) + 8O2 (g) Æ 8SO2 (g)
Sulphur is the raw material for the production of sulphuric acid (H2
SO4
) by the Contact
Process. This process of sulphuric acid production involves the following steps.
Step 1: Sulphur is first oxidized to produce sulphur dioxide:
S8 (s) + 8O2 (g) Æ 8SO2 (g)
Step 2: Sulphur dioxide is converted to sulphur trioxide at high temperatures in the presence
of a catalyst:
2SO2 (g) + O2 V O
 2 5→ 2SO3 (g)
Step 3: Sulphur trioxide is absorbed into concentrated sulphuric acid to produce oleum
(H2
S2
O7
).
SO3 (g) + H2SO4 (l) Æ H2S2O7 (l)
Step 4: The oleum is then diluted with water to produce the desired concentration of
sulphuric acid. Commercially used concentrated sulphuric acid is 98% H2
SO4
.
H2S2O7 (l) + H2O (l) Æ 2H2SO4 (aq)
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
211
E. Chlorine
Activity 4.13
1. When we turn on the water tap, the water coming out of the tap sometimes appears white
and turns normal after a few minutes. Many people say that the white colour we see is due
to chlorine. Do you agree? Discuss in group and present your opinion to the class.
2. What is the purpose of adding chlorine to drinking water?
Occurrence and Extraction
Chlorine belongs to group VIIA, known as the halogens. It is the most abundant element
among the halogens. It is found in nature in the form of compounds only. Chlorine is found
in nature chiefly in the form of chlorides of sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium.
Sodium chloride is the chief source of chlorine, and it is obtained from seawater or as
deposits of rock salt.
Commercially, chlorine is manufactured by the electrolysis of a concentrated aqueous solution
of sodium chloride. During electrolysis of the concentrated solution, chlorine is formed at
the anode and the reduction of water occurs at the cathode, producing hydrogen gas and
hydroxide ions (OH–
). The electrode and the overall cell reactions are as follows:
Oxidation at anode: 2Cl– (aq) Æ Cl2 (g) + 2e–
Reduction at cathode: 2H2O (l) + 2e– Æ H2 (g) + 2OH– (aq)
Cell reaction: 2NaCl (aq) + 2H2O (l) Æ 2NaOH (aq) + Cl2 (g) + H2 (g)
Although NaOH forms at the cathode compartment and Cl2
 at the anode, the two substances
must be kept apart from one another. This is because, if they come into contact with each
other, they can react according to the following equation.
NaOH (aq) + Cl2 (g) Æ NaOCl (aq) + HCl (aq)
What is the oxidation number of chlorine in NaOCl?
Physical Properties of Chlorine
Activity 4.14
1. In urban area, tap water possesses a peculiar smell, which disappeares after a few minutes.
Many people say that the smell is due to chlorine. Do you agree? Discuss in group and
present your opinion to the class.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
212
Some of its physical properties are the following:
• Chlorine is a greenish-yellow gas at room temperature.
• It melts at –102°C and boils at –34°C.
• It is fairly soluble in water.
• It is extremely poisonous, causing inflammation of the lungs and mucous membranes
if inhaled, even in very small amounts. It is fatal if inhaled in higher amounts.
Chemical Properties of Chlorine
Chlorine is a highly reactive non-metal. It reacts directly with almost all elements except
the noble gases, carbon and nitrogen. It is a powerful oxidizing agent and oxidizes most of
the elements with which it reacts. The following are the main reactions of chlorine.
Chlorine reacts with heated metals to form chloride salts
2Fe (s) + 3Cl2 (g) Æ 2FeCl3 (s)
2Al (s) + 3Cl2 (g) Æ 2AlCl3 (s)
Chlorine reacts smoothly with hydrogen, in the presence of a charcoal as a catalyst, at
room temperature to form hydrogen chloride.
H2 (g) + Cl2 (g) Æ 2HCl (g)
Chlorine displaces less reactive halogens (Br2
 and I2
) from aqueous solutions of their
compounds.
Cl2 (g) + 2KBr (aq) Æ 2KCl (aq) + Br2 (l)
Cl2 (g) + 2Kl (aq) Æ 2KCl (aq) + l2 (aq)
Can bromine displace chlorine in a chemical reaction?
Chlorine dissolves in water and reacts with it, forming an acidic solution containing
hydrochloric acid (HCl) and hypochlorous acid (HOCl).
Cl2 (g) + H2O (l) Æ HCl (aq) + HOCl (aq)
This type of reaction is called a disproportionation reaction, where chlorine is itself reduced
and oxidized.
Chlorine is commercially used as a bleaching agent and disinfectant (kills germs). As
elemental chlorine or as chlorine water, it is strong enough to oxidize dyes and to bleach
coloured materials. For example, it can be used to remove yellow or brown colours from
wood pulp, paper and cotton.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
213
Exercise 4.3
1. What are the main natural sources of N, P, O, S, and Cl?
2. Describe the main processes involved in the production (extraction) of N, P, O, S
and Cl.
3. How do N, P, and S behave when heated in air?
4. Write an equation for the reaction of chlorine with water.
5. Consult the books present in your library and describe with the aid of labelled
diagrams the laboratory preparation of following molecules:
a N2 b Cl2
4.4 SOME INDUSTRIES IN ETHIOPIA
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define industry;
• list some industries in Ethiopia;
• describe the general characteristics of industries;
• outline the important steps in the productions of ceramics;
• mention some uses of ceramics;
• outline the important steps in the production of cement;
• outline the important steps in the production of sugar;
• outline the important steps in the production of pulp and paper;
• explain how tanning is carried out;
• describe the application of the chemical preservation of skin and hides;
• mention some uses of skin and hides;
• explain the process of food packing and preservation; and
• present a report to the class after visiting a nearby food factory.
1. Define industry.
2. What are the general characteristics of chemical industries?
3. List some common chemical industries in Ethiopia, mention products manufactured by
them in tabular form.
Activity 4.15
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
214
Glass
Glass is an amorphous or non-crystalline solid material. Almost all glass contains silica as
the main component. Quartz glassis made by melting pure silica, SiO2, at a temperature of
about 2300°C and then pouring the molten viscous liquid into moulds. It is of high strength,
low thermal expansion and highly transparent.
Soda-lime glass is ordinary glass which is a mixture of sodium silicate and calcium silicate.
It is made by heating a mixture of silica sand, sodium carbonate or sodium sulphate and
limestone. The reactions that take place in forming soda-lime glass are the following:
Na2CO3 + SiO2 Æ Na2SiO3 + CO2
CaCO3 + SiO2 Æ CaSiO3 + CO2
Soda-lime glass accounts for about 90% of manufactured glass. This type of glass is widely
used for window panes, bottles, dishes etc.
Borosilicate glassis commonly known as Pyrex. It is manufactured using boron (III)
oxide, B2
O3
, instead of limestone or calcium oxide. This glass has high resistance to chemical
corrosion and temperature changes and is widely used to make ovenware and laboratory
equipment such as flasks, beakers, and test tubes.
Steps in glass production
i) Batch preparation:refers to the preparation of the raw materials according to the
appropriate combinations. The raw materials are mixed in a proportion of 60%
sand, 21% sodium carbonate and 19% limestone.
ii) Glass melting: The raw materials and recycled glass (according to their colour)
are fed into a glass-melting furnace. The materials are then heated to a temperature
of about 1600°C to form a molten viscous liquid. Why are glasses is separated
according to the colour?
The furnace operates continuously, producing glass 24 hours a day. Substances that
give the glass different colours or improved chemical and physical properties such
as transparency, thermal and chemical stability and mechanical strength are added
during this process.
PROJECT 4.2
1. Have you ever wondered how glass retains different colours? Consult books
in your library and make list of the compounds added to impart colour to the
glass.
2. Can glass be recycled; how?
Submit your findings to your teacher.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
215
1. Are you familiar with the pottery industry? Do you know any ceramic factories in
Ethiopia?
3. Prepare a list of ceramic products used in daily life.
Discuss in groups and give presentation to the class.
Ceramic is an inorganic, non-metallic solid prepared by the action of heat and subsequent
cooling. Traditional ceramics, such as porcelain, tiles and pottery are formed from minerals
such as clay, talc and feldspar. Most industrial ceramics, however, are formed from
extremely pure powders of specialty chemicals, such as silicon carbide, alumina, barium
titanate, and titanium carbide.
Manufacturing of ceramics
The minerals used to make ceramics are dug out of the earth and are then crushed and
ground into a fine powder. Manufacturers often purify this powder by mixing it in a solution
and allowing a chemical precipitate (a uniform solid that forms within a solution) to
form. The precipitate is then separated from the solution. The powder is heated to drive off
impurities including water.
The processes of manufacturing ceramics include:
A Moulding: After purification, small amounts of wax are often added to bind the ceramic
powder and make it more workable. Plastics may also be added to the powder to
give the desired pliability and softness. The powder can then be shaped into different
objects by various moulding processes.
B Densification:The process of densification uses intense heat to condense a ceramic
object into a strong, dense product. After being moulded, the ceramic object is
heated in an electric furnace to temperatures between 1000°C and 1700°C. As the
iii) Glass forming: This is the stage in which the melted glass is made into a required
shape.
iv) Annealing: This is a process that involves the removal of internal stresses by reheating
the glass followed by a controlled slow-cooling cycle during which the stresses are
relieved.
v) Inspection: It involves testing of the glass product to check whether it fulfils desired
quality requirements or not.
vi) Packing and dispatching is the final stage before distribution.
Ceramics
Activity 4.16
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
216
ceramic heats, the powder particles coalesce, much as water droplets join at room
temperature. As the ceramic particles merge, the object becomes increasingly dense,
shrinking by up to 20 percent of its original size. The goal of this heating process is
to maximize the strength of ceramic by obtaining an internal structure that is compact
and extremely dense.
In general, most ceramics are hard and wear-resistant, brittle, refractory, thermal and
electrical insulators, non-magnetic, oxidation-resistant, and chemically stable.
Due to the wide range of properties of ceramic materials, they are used for a multitude of
applications.
• Well-known uses of ceramics: They are commonly found in art sculptures, dishes,
platters and other kitchenware, kitchen tiles and bath room structures.
• Lesser-known uses for ceramics: They are used as electrical insulators,
computers parts, tools, dental replacements, engine parts, and tiles on space shuttles
and to replace bones such as the bones in hips, knees and shoulders.
• Future uses of ceramics: In future, the ceramics might be used to remove impurities
from the drinking water, and to replace diseased heart valves.
Cement
1. How many cement factories do you know in Ethiopia? Name the regions where they
are found and share these with your classmates.
2. Why are cement factories located in rural areas of Ethiopia? Give your reasons to the
class.
Cement is made by heating limestone (chalk), alumina (Al2
O3
) and silica-bearing materials
such as clay to 1450°C in a kiln using a process known as calcination. The resulting hard
substance called ‘clinker’ is then ground with a small amount of gypsum into a powder to
make “ordinary Portland cement” (OPC).
Cement mainly consists of calcium silicate (CaSiO3
), calcium aluminate (CaAl2
O4
), iron
(III) oxide (Fe2
O3
) and magnesium oxide (MgO).
Portland cement is a very important building material, and was first discovered in England.
It received its name because, on setting, it hardens to a stone-like mass and was compared
to the famous Portland Rock of England. It is a mixture of calcium and aluminium silicates
with gypsum.
Raw Materials: Limestone and clay are the chief raw materials used in the
manufacture of Portland cement.
Activity 4.17
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
217
Manufacturing Process: First, limestone and clay are crushed separately. They are
then mixed in the required quantities and finally mixed and ground together, which can
be done either by the dry or wet process. The wet process is suitable if the limestone
and clay are soft. If the raw materials are hard, the dry process is preferred. The dry
process is cost-effective because fuel consumption is less when the raw materials are
burnt in a rotary kiln.
Figure 4.7 Cement manufacturing process.
– Upper Part of the Kiln
Raw material heated ∆ → 
complete elimination of moisture
– Middle Part of the Kiln
Limestone decomposes to calcium oxide.
CaCO (s) CaO (s) + CO (g) 3 2
∆ →
– Lower End of the Kiln
In this part, the temperature reaches about 1600°C;the partly fused and sintered mixture
undergoes a series of chemical reactions to form calcium aluminates and silicates.
2CaO + 2SiO2 Æ 2CaO.SiO2 (di-calcium silicate)
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
218
3CaO + 3SiO2 Æ 3CaO.SiO2
 (tri-calcium silicate)
3CaO + 3Al2
O3 Æ 3CaO.Al2
O3
 (tri-calcium aluminate).
4CaO + 4Al2
O3 + 4Fe2
O3 Æ 4CaO.Al2
O3
.Fe2
O3
 (tetra-calcium aluminium ferrate)
MgO + SiO2 Æ MgSiO3
 (magnesium silicate)
The resulting mixture of all these silicates and aluminates is called cement clinker. After
cooling, it is mixed with 2-3% gypsum (calcium sulphate) and ground to a fine powder.
Gypsum slows down the rate of setting of cement, so that the cement hardens adequately.
Table 4.3 The approximate composition of cement.
Component Percentage
Calcium oxide (CaO) 50-60 %
Silica (SiO2) 20-25 %
Alumina (Al2O3) 5-10 %
Magnesium Oxide (MgO) 2-3 %
Ferric oxide (Fe2O3) 1-2 %
Sulphur trioxide(SO3) 1-2 %
Setting of Cement
When mixed with water cement first forms a plastic mass that hardens after sometime. This
is due to the formation of three-dimensional cross-links between –Si–O–Si– and –Si–O–
Al– chains.
The first setting occurs within 24 hours, whereas, the subsequent hardening requires about
two weeks. In the hardening process of cement, the transition from plastic to solid state is
called setting.
PROJECT 4.3
Take a 0.5 kg of cement and mix it with correct proportion of sand and water. Mix
the compoment well till a palstic mass is formed. Take this plastic mass and construct
a model of any object. Start pouring water on the model starting from the second day
onwards. Report the changes to the class after 24 hours and after two weeks.
Sugar Manufacturing
Activity 4.18
1. Prepare a list of foods and drinks used at your home in which sugar is an ingredient.
2. Is sugar made only from sugar cane? If no, what are the other sources? Discuss in
group and give a presentation to the class.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
219
Sugarcane is a perennial herb belonging to the grass family. Native to tropical and subtropical
regions of the world, this tropical grass is about 3 metres tall.
Planting: Sugarcane is planted in fields by workers or mechanical planters. Typical cane
soil is made from the mixture of silts, clay particles and organic matter. Fertilizers are
applied from the time of planting up until the beginning of the ripening period, depending on
the region where the crop is planted. Cane seasons last from 8-22 months.
1. Collecting the Harvest: Mature canes are gathered by a combination of manual
and mechanical methods. The cane is cut at ground level, the leaves are removed,
the top is trimmed off (by cutting off the last mature joint) the canes and transported
to a sugar factory.
2. Cleansing and Grinding: The stalks are thoroughly washed and cut at the sugar
mill. After the cleaning process, a machine led by a series of rotating knives, shreds
the cane into pieces. This is known as “grinding”. During grinding, hot water is
sprayed onto the sugarcane to dissolve the remaining hard sugar. The shredded
cane is then spread out on a conveyer belt.
3. Juicing:The shredded sugarcane travels on the conveyor belt through a series of
heavy-duty rollers, which extract juice from the pulp. The pulp that remains, or “bagasse”,
is dried and used as a fuel. The raw juice moves on through the mill to be clarified.
4. Clarifying:Carbon dioxide and milk of lime are added to the liquid sugar mixture,
which is heated until boiling. The process of clarifying begins at this stage. As the
carbon dioxide moves through the liquid, it forms calcium carbonate, which attracts
non-sugar debris (fats, gums and waxes) from the juice, and pulls them away from
the sugar juice. The juice is then pushed through a series of filters to remove any
remaining impurities.
5. Evaporation: The clear juice that results from the clarifying process is put under a
vacuum, where the juice boils at a low temperature and the water in it begins to
evaporate. It is heated until it forms into thick, brown syrup.
6. Crystallization:Crystallization is the process of evaporating the water from the
sugar syrup. Pulverized sugar is fed into a sterilized vacuum pan. As the liquid
evaporates, crystals form. The remaining mixture is a thick mass of large crystals.
These crystals are sent to a centrifuge that spins and dries them. The dried product
is raw sugar, which is edible.
7. Refinery: Raw sugar is transported to a cane sugar refinery for the removal of
molasses, minerals and other non-sugars that contaminate it. This is known as the
purification process. Raw sugar is mixed with a solution of sugar and water to loosen
the molasses from the outside of the raw sugar crystals, producing a thick matter
known as “magma”. Large machines then spin the magma, separating the molasses
from the crystals. The crystals are promptly washed, dissolved and filtered to remove
impurities. The golden syrup that is produced is then sent through filters, and SO2 is
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
220
passed through it to remove the colour and water. The process of removing colour
is known as bleaching.What is left is concentrated, clear syrup which is again fed
into a vacuum pan for evaporation.
8. Separation and packaging:Once the final evaporation and drying process is done,
screens separate the different- sized sugar crystals. Large and small crystals are
packaged and labelled as white refined sugar.
Figure 4.8 Steps involved in sugar production.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
221
Discuss the following issues in the group and give a presentation to your class:
1. Wasting paper is like chopping down trees. Comment.
2. Some papers are relatively cheap. The paper used for this grade 10 text book, for
example, is expensive. Are different types of paper manufactured by different
processes?
Wood is the raw material for making wood pulp and paper. Wood pulp is a dry fibrous
material used for making paper. The timber resources used to make wood pulp are referred
to as pulp wood. Wood pulp is made from soft-wood trees, such as spruce, pine, fir, larch
and hemlock, and from hard woods,such as eucalyptus, aspen and birch.
Wood is composed of cellulose, lignin, oils and resins. Lignin is used to bind fibres of
cellulose together. To provide wood pulp, the cellulose must be separated from the lignin.
Manufacturing of pulp and paper involves the following steps:
1. Harvesting trees involves the cutting down of trees from their growing areas and
transporting the timber to the paper and pulp industry.
2. Preparation for pulping is a step in which the bark ofthe tree is removed and then
the wood is chipped and screened to provide uniform sized chips (pieces).
3. Pulping is a step used to make wood pulp from the chipped wood pieces. This can
be accomplished by either mechanical or chemical means depending on the strength
and grade of paper to be manufactured.
a Mechanical pulping: It utilizes steam, pressure and high temperatures instead
of chemicals to tear the fibres. The fibre quality is greatly reduced because
mechanical pulping creates short, weak fibres that still contain the lignin that bonds
the fibres together. Paper used for newspapers are a typical product of
mechanical pulping.
b Chemical pulping:Chemical pulp is produced by combining wood chips and
chemicals in large vessels called digesters. Heat and the chemicals break down
the lignin which binds the cellulose fibres together without seriously degrading
the cellulose fibres. Chemical pulp is manufactured using the Kraft process or
the Sulphite Process.
i) The Kraft Processis the dominant chemical pulping method. It is the most
widely used method for making pulp from all types of trees. The process uses
Paper and Pulp
Activity 4.19
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
222
aqueous sodium hydroxide and sodium sulphide as a digestion solution. After
digestion for about four hours at a temperature of 170o
C, the pulp is separated
by filtration. This process uses a basic digestion medium.
ii) The Sulphite Process uses a cooking liquor (digestion) solution of sodium
bisulphate or magnesium bisulphate digester at pH of about 3 in a pulp.
The action of the hydrogen sulphide ions at 60o
C over 6 to 12 hours dissolves
the lignin and separates it from the cellulose. After the process is complete,
the pulp is recovered by filtration.
The wood pulp achieved from the Sulphite or Kraft processes is washed to
remove chemicals and passed through a series of screens to remove foreign
materials.
4. Bleaching: It is the process of removing colouring matter from wood pulp and
increasing its brightness. The most common bleaching agents are strong oxidizing
agents such as chlorine, chlorine oxide, ozone and hydrogen peroxide.
5. Making paper from pulp:After bleaching, the pulp is processed into liquid stock
that can be transferred to a paper mill. The suspension is poured onto a continuously
moving screen belt and the liquor is allowed to seep away by gravity to produce
paper sheet. The continuous sheet then moves through additional rollers that compress
the fibres and remove the residual water to produce fine paper.
Tannery
1. The leather products of Ethiopia are durable and relatively cheaper than the same
products imported from outside. Why do people prefer to buy imported products?
What can you suggest to change this attitude? Discuss this matter in class in relation to
quality and availability of resources.
2. Why are leather products being replaced by synthetic products?
Discuss in groups and present to the class.
Tanning is a process of converting raw animal hides and skin to leather, using tannin. Leather
is a durable and flexible material created by the tanning of animal hides and skin. Tannin is
an acidic chemical that permanently alters the protein structure of a skin so that it can never
return to rawhide or skin again.
Leather production involves various preparatory stages, tanning, and crusting
1. Preparatory stages are those in which the hide or skin is prepared for tanning.
This stage includes curing, soaking, flesh removal, hair removal, scudding, and
deliming.
Activity 4.20
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
223
a Curing: This process involves salting or drying the hide once it has been removed
from the animal. Curing is employed to prevent putrefaction of the protein
substance, collagen, from bacterial infection. Curing also removes excess water
from the hide and skin. Brine curing is the simplest and fastest method.
b Soaking: In this process, cured hides are soaked in water for several hours to
several days to remove salt, dirt, debris, blood and excess animal fat from the
skin.
c Flesh removal: In this process, animal hides are moved through a machine
that strips the flesh from the surface of the hide.
d Hair removal:In this step, the soaked hides and skins are transported to large
vats where they are immersed in a mixture of lime and water. This process is
called liming. It loosens the hair from the skin and makes hair-removal easier.
After 1–10 days soaking, the hair is mechanically removed from the hide by a
hair-removing machine.
e Scudding: This is the process in which hair and fat missed by the machines are
removed from the hide with a plastic tool or dull knife.
f Deliming: This process involves the removal of lime from the skin or hide in a
vat of acid. After this preparatory process, the skin or hide is ready for tanning.
2. Tanning is a process that converts the protein of the raw hide or skin into a stable
material. There are two main types of tanning:
a Vegetable or natural tanning: The skin is placed in a solution of tannin. Tannins
occur naturally in the barks and leaves of many plants. The primary barks used in
modern times are chestnut, oak, tanoak, hemlock, quebracho, mangrove,
wattle (acacia) and myrobalan. Naturally tanned hide is flexible and is used
for making shoes, luggage and furniture.
b Mineral tanning: In this process, the skin is placed in solutions of chemicals
such as chromium sulphate and other salts of chromium. Chrome tanning is faster
than natural (vegetable) tanning and requires only twenty four hours. The leather
is greenish-blue in colour derived from the chromium. This process produces
stretchable leather that is used for making garments and handbags.
3. Crusting: This is the final stage in leather manufacturing and includes dyeing, rolling
the leather to make it strong, stretching it in a heat-controlled room and performing
a process that involves covering the grain surface with chemical compounds such as
wax, oil, glazes etc. to make the leather very attractive.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
224
1. The rate of spoilage of food is faster in open air in comparison to foods kept inside the
refrigerator. Explain. Discuss in group and present your findings to the class.
Food preservation is the process of treating and handling food to stop or greatly reduce
spoilage, loss of quality, edibility or nutritive value caused or accelerated by microorganisms.
Preservation usually involves preventing the growth of bacteria, fungi and other microorganisms, as well as reducing the oxidation of fats, which causes rancidity.
Food Processing and Preservation
1. What are the traditional methods used to preserve food for a long time without
spoilage at your home?
2. What modern methods of food preserving and processing do we use in Ethiopia?
Discuss in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Modern methods of food preservation are:
a Freezing: This is one of the most commonly used processes, commercially and
domestically, for preserving a very wide range of foods such as potatoes, as well as
prepared foodstuffs that would not require freezing in their normal state.
b Freeze-drying: Water vapour has easier access through the cell structure of any
product compared to water-penetrating the product and evaporating from the surface
of the product as is the case of other drying methods. The gentle escape of water
vapour in the freeze-drying process leaves the product close to its original shape,
taste, and colour and there is no loss of aroma or flavour.
For example, liquids such as coffee, tea, juices and other extracts, vegetables,
segments of fish and meat products. Freeze-drying is a superior preservation method
for a variety of food products and food ingredients.
c Vacuum-packing: Stores food in a vacuum environment, usually in an air-tight bag
or bottle. The vacuum environment strips bacteria of the oxygen needed for survival,
slowing down the rate of spoiling. Vacuum-packing is commonly used for storing
nuts to reduce loss of flavour from oxidation.
Activity 4.22
Activity 4.21
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
225
Exercise 4.4
1. What is the basic difference in the composition of glass and cement?
2. What is ceramics?
3. Write the main chemical equations involved in the production of cement.
4. Describe the refinery processes involved in sugar production.
5. Explain the difference between chemical and mechanical pulping.
6. How does natural tanning differ from mineral tanning?
7. Point out the modern methods of food preservation.
4.5 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION
Competencies
After completing this section, you will be able to:
• define pollution;
• list the three types of pollution;
• list the names of common air pollutants;
• describe the effects of air pollutants;
• describe some of the main methods used to reduce air pollution;
• describe the different types of industrial water pollutants;
• explain some of the factors involved in water pollution and their effects;
• describe some of the methods used to reduce water pollution;
• explain some of the factors involved in land pollution;
• describe some of the main methods used to reduce land pollution; and
• carry out a project on the effects(s) of an industry on environment.
Activity 4.23
1. The Copenhagen summit was a popular international climate change summit. What
was the role played by Ethiopia? What were the major issues of the summit?
2. Mention any activity in your area to bring awareness of air pollution and global
warming.
Discuss in your group and present to the class.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
226
Pollution is any discharge of a solid, liquid or gaseous substance or radiation (energy) into
an environment that causes unwanted changes. Pollution causes short-term or long-term
harm that affects the earth’s ecological balance and lowers the quality of life in the
environment. A pollutant is any substance that changes air, water or any other natural
resource in a way that impairs the use of the resource.
Pollutants are discharged into the environment as a result of natural events (like a volcanic
eruption) and as a result of human activities (such as the operation of chemical industries,
agriculture, etc.). Pollutants can be classified by the type of pollution they cause: air pollution,
water pollution, and land pollution.
Air Pollution
1. Based on the situation of your locality, discuss the following issues in groups and
present the findings to the class:
a List some human activities which contribute to air pollution.
b How these activities contribute to air pollution?
c What solutions do you recommend to overcome these problems?
d What could be your contribution to reduce air pollutions?
2. Give your suggestions on the statement, ‘Air pollution any where is a potential threat
elsewhere.’
Air pollution is caused by the presence of contaminant gaseous substances in the air that
affect the lives of plants and animals on earth. Some common air pollutants are sulphur
dioxide, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, ozone, hydrocarbons, particulates,
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and lead compounds.
Sulphur dioxide (SO2
):This enters the atmospheric air from the combustion of coal and
petroleum, and during extraction of metals from their sulphide ores. It causes coughing,
chest pains and shortness of breath. It is thought to be a cause for bronchitis and lung
diseases. It slowly oxidizes to SO3
 by reacting with the oxygen in the air.
Oxides of nitrogen: These can be formed in the atmosphere by natural processes like
thunderstorms. Combustion of fossil fuel containing nitrogen compounds as impurities and
exhaust gases from furnaces and engines increase the amount of nitric oxide, NO, and
nitrogen dioxide, NO2
, in the atmosphere. Nitric oxide, NO, catalyzes the decomposition
of ozone in the upper layer of the atmosphere to oxygen, thus decreasing the ozone layer.
2O3 (g) NO → 3O2 (g)
Activity 4.24
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
227
Nitric oxide is oxidized by oxygen to nitrogen dioxide in the presence of ultraviolet light.
2NO (g) + O2 (g) Æ 2NO2 (g)
SO2
, SO3
 and NO2
 react with rainwater and form sulphurous acid (H2
SO3
), sulphuric
acid (H2
SO4
) and nitric acid (HNO3
), respectively and cause acid rain. Acid rain accelerates
corrosion and the deterioration of metals, buildings, statues and also causes tree defoliation,
release of heavy metal ions from soil into water courses and drop in the pH of water in
rivers and lakes.
Hydrocarbons and ozone are responsible for photochemical smog. It is characterized by
a reddish-brown haze containing substances irritating to the eye, nose, and lungs, and
causes extensive damage to vegetation. Considerable amounts of hydrocarbons are released
into the atmosphere by the evaporation of gasoline as unburnt hydrocarbons in auto exhaust.
These substances react with ozone to give compounds that contribute to the oxidizing
nature of photochemical smog.
Carbon monoxide: Most of the carbon monoxide escapes into the atmosphere due to
the incomplete combustion of fuel. Prolonged exposure to carbon monoxide impairs vision,
produces headaches, and exerts strain on the heart. It also reduces the oxygen-carrying
capacity of the blood by reacting with haemoglobin.
Particulates: Dust storms, forest fires, volcanic eruptions and human activities such as
mining and burning coal and oil increase the amount of solid particles in the air. Industrial
areas contain particles of limestone, fertilizers, coal, stones, cement and silica. These
particulates irritate the lungs and deleteriously affect breathing.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs):Chlorofluorocarbons are used as refrigerants, solvents
and plastic foam-blowing agents. When entering the atmosphere, they penetrate into the
upper layers and interact with ultraviolet radiation as follows.
CF2
Cl2 
UV → CF2
Cl. + .Cl
The free chlorine, Cl, reacts with ozone to form chlorine monoxide and oxygen.
.Cl + O3
 Æ ClO. + O2
These reactions result in the conversion of ozone to molecular oxygen and contribute to
depletion of the ozone layer. This situation in the upper atmosphere allows dangerous
ultraviolet radiation to reach the earth’s surface. This radiation causes skin cancer in human beings.
Excess carbon dioxide: The combustion of coal and petroleum to generate electricity,
move our vehicles, heat our homes and supply power to our industrial machinery causes a
significant increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Combustion
of these fuels releases about 20 billion tonnes of CO2
 annually. The increase in the
concentration of CO2
 in the atmosphere has resulted in a rise in the average global
temperature, owing to the greenhouse effect. Carbon dioxide and water vapour absorb
infrared radiation, re-radiated from the earth, behaving like the glass in a green house.
Since CO2
 and water vapour absorb heat they are called green-house gases. Due to the
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
228
absorption of heat by the green house gases in the atmosphere, the overall effect is global
warming (an increase in the average temperature of our planet). This rise in global
temperature causes melting of polar ice and thus additional water flowing into the oceans.
This situation, in turn, results in the rising of the levels of seas and oceans, flooding of
coastlines and lowland areas, which can submerge these areas.
Heavy metals: Lead contamination in the atmosphere is a result of vehicle engines that
use fuels containing tetraethyl lead which is added to the fuel to reduce engine knocking.
The use of lead paints also contributes towards lead contamination. High levels of lead
cause damage to the brain, kidneys and liver.
What are the potential air pollutants in and around your home?
Methods of Reducing Air Pollution:
Activity 4.25
Research and writing
Investigating the effects of air pollution on the environment by:
a consulting experts working on environmental protection, and
b referring materials available in you school library. Write a report about your findings
and give a presentation to the class.
Water Pollution
1. Name the major air pollutants.
2. What methods do you recommend to reduce air pollution? Discuss in groups and
present your idea s to the class.
Activity 4.26
1. In your community,
a What are the major sources of drinking water?
b What are the principal sources of contamination of surface water and ground water?
c What could be done to reduce these problems?
Discuss in groups and present to the class.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
229
Water pollution is the degradation of the quality of water brought about by the discharge
into it of untreated sewage, industrial and agricultural waste, and oil spillage. In general,
water is said to be polluted if it contains matter that affects the health of living things or
causes damage to property. The major water pollutants are nitrate and phosphate fertilisers
washed out of the soil, phosphate detergents, untreated sewage, insecticides and herbicides,
and the heavy metal ion, acidic and/or basic residues released by industrial processes.
Phosphate and nitrate fertilisers washed out of the soil and phosphate detergents from
untreated water, enter natural water systems, such as streams, rivers, lakes, and seas.
These dissolved minerals are valuable nutrients for plants, and their discharge into the
water systems accelerates the growth of surface-water plants, such as algae. As a result,
less light reaches the bottom-living plants, which reduces the photosynthesis they need to
live, and they die. When these aquatic plants die, they rot under the action of bacteria
which multiply greatly and consume the oxygen dissolved in the water at a rate faster than
natural aeration or photosynthesis can replenish. Thus, the amount of oxygen in the water
decreases. This depletion of oxygen kills aquatic animals like fish. This sequence of events
is called eutrophication.
Insecticides (pesticides) and herbicides applied in agriculture may also be washed into
lakes, rivers, streams and seas. Some of the insecticides and herbicides do not decompose
easily and are persistent in the environment. Residues of these insecticides and herbicides
may enter the food chains and accumulate in an organism that is consumed by the next
organism. The increasing amount of insecticide and herbicide residue in the bodies of
animals causes health and behavioural problems.
The release of heavy metal ions, acidic and/or basic residues from industrial processes into
natural water systems, such as lakes and rivers, causes pH changes in the water. Water
organisms need specific ranges of water pH to survive, so these changes in pH can kill
them. In the same way, increasing concentrations of toxic metal ions kills some aquatic
organisms.
The release of untreated sewage to natural water systems can spread water-borne diseases
such as cholera, typhoid, hepatitis, and polio.
Methods of Reducing Water Pollution:
1. Treatment of water before discharge into rivers and lakes.
2. To avoid unnatural temperature changes in natural water systems, industries should
not discharge heat-ladened water into them.
3. Recycling industrial and agricultural wastes.
4. Using moderate amounts of agricultural chemicals and increasing the use of organic
fertilizers and biological methods to control pests.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
230
PROJECT 4.4
Develop a water conservation plan for your school and submit it to your teacher.
Land Pollution
Activity 4.27
Discuss the following issues and present your answer to your class.
1. Do you observe any pollution of land in your environment?
2. What are the causes of land pollution?
3. Do you observe soil erosion in your area? What three major things do you believe
elected officials should take to decrease soil erosion in the region you live?
4. What should be your responsibility in solving the land pollution problems?
Land pollution is caused by things we put into it. It results from the spillage of oil,
leaching of harmful chemicals and heavy metal ions, and dumping of nonbiodegradable wastes such as plastics.
Factors involved in land pollution include:
• Spillages of oil from leaking pipelines.
• Harmful heavy metal ions from buried waste leaching into water systems.
• Leaching of harmful chemicals from corroded metal drums which have been buried
underground.
• Dumping of non-biodegradable (do not decompose by the action of bacteria)
wastes like plastics which remain unchanged in the soil for decades or hundreds of
years. Their accumulation in the soil hinders air and water movement and affects the
growth of plants.
• Excessive use of synthetic fertilisers in agricultural activities also contributes towards
land pollution.
What are the contributions of commercial inorganic fertilizers to land pollution?
Methods of Reducing Land Pollution:
Activity 4.28
What methods should be practiced globally to reduce land pollution? Discuss in groups
and present your opinion to the class.
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
231
Research and writing
Investigating the effects of an industry on the environment
This project work will develop your skills in identifying problems that an industry can
cause in your environment and help you to seek solutions to overcome the problem.
Select an industry close to your school or home. Try to identify the following
1. What are the products manufactured by the industry?
2. What are the raw materials used by the industry?
3. What is the manufacturing process involved?
4. What are the waste products generated?
5. What happens to the waste products? (How does the industry discharge wastes)
6. How is the environment affected by the industrial waste product?
7. How could the environmental impact of waste product be reduced?
Write a report in groups and give a presentation to the class.
Exercise 4.5
1. Describe the main agents of:
a air pollution b water pollution c land pollution
2. What are the main methods of reducing:
a air pollution b water pollution c land pollution
Check list
Key terms of the unit
• allotrope
• alloy
• Basic – oxygen process
• bauxite cryolite
• Bessmer converter
• blast furnace
• blister copper
• ceramics
• chemical industry
• Chile salt peter
• chlorine
• Contact process
• flotation
• fluoroapatite
• flux
• food preservation
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
232
Unit Summary
• A chemical industry is any institution involved in the production of chemicals.
• A chemical industry is characterized by using raw materials available in nature
and transforming them into desired products by chemical means.
• Most of the materials used by the industries are present in nature.
• Natural resources are classified as renewable and non-renewable.
• Aluminium is the most abundant metal in the earth’s crust. It is manufactured
by the electrolysis of molten aluminium oxide mixed with cryolite using the
Hall process.
• Aluminium is used to make light-weight alloys that can be used for aircraft
and similar constructions.
• Aluminium resists corrosion due to the formation of a thin film of an oxide on
its surface.
• Iron is the second-most abundant metal in the earth’s crust.
• Iron is extracted in a blast furnace. The furnace is charged with iron ore, coke
and limestone, and hot air is blown up from the bottom.
• Limestone is used in the blast furnace to remove impurities like sand (silica) in
the form of slag.
• The type of iron obtained directly from the blast furnace is called pig iron and
it is impure.
• Wrought iron is the purest form of iron obtained from pig-iron by removing
most of the impurities.
• fractional distillation
• Frasch process
• glass
• Haber process
• Hall process
• nitrogen
• Occurrence
• Open – hearth fumace
• ore
• paper and pulp
• pollutants
• pollution
• redphosphorus
• rock phosphate
• slag
• steel
• sugar
• sulphur
• tanning
• thermite process
• verdigris
• white phosphorus
CHEMISTRY IN INDUSTRY AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION (UNIT 4)
233
• Steel is an alloy of iron containing definite amounts of carbon and other metals
like chromium, nickel, tungsten, vanadium, manganese etc.
• Steel is manufactured by the Bessemer Converter, Open-Hearth Furnace and
Basic Oxygen Processes.
• Copper is extracted by roasting chalcopyrites (CuFeS2
).
• Copper that is obtained by roasting chalcopyrites is called blister copper. It is
impure, and it is refined further by electrolysis.
• Copper is malleable and ductile, a good conductor of heat and electricity and
is used to make electric wires and in the manufacture of alloys.
• Nitrogen constitutes about 80% by volume of atmospheric air.
• Nitrogen is manufactured by the fractional distillation of liquefied air.
• Nitrogen is relatively inert. However, its reactivity increases when heated and
combined with metals of group IA and IIA to form nitrides and with oxygen to
form oxides like NO and NO2
.
• Phosphorus is manufactured by heating a mixture of rock phosphate, coke
(carbon) and silica in an electric furnace.
• Phosphorus has two common allotropes, white and red phosphorus. White
phosphorus is highly reactive, while red phosphorous is relatively stable.
• White phosphorus is stored under water.
• Phosphorus reacts with oxygen and chlorine.
• Oxygen makes up about 20% by volume of air. It is manufactured by the
fractional distillation of liquid air.
• Oxygen is the most abundant element in the earth’s crust.
• Sulphur exists in the elemental state in underground deposits from which it is
extracted by the Frasch process.
• Sulphur reacts with oxygen to form sulphur dioxide and sulphur trioxide.
• Sulphur is used for the manufacture of sulphuric acid by the Contact Process.
• Chlorine is manufactured by the electrolysis of brine.
• Chlorine is a powerful oxidizing agent and reacts with heated metals to form
chlorides.
• Chlorine and chlorine water are used to bleach coloured materials and as
disinfectant.
• Glass is a mixture of two or more silicates.
• Pyrex is a glass containing boron. It resists high temperatures.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 10
234
• Ceramics are materials that are baked or fired at very high temperatures.
• Cement is made by heating a ground mixture of sand and clay. It contains calcium
oxide, silicon dioxide, aluminium oxide, iron (III) oxide, and magnesium oxide.
• Sugar is manufactured from sugarcane in a series of steps.
• Paper and pulp are manufactured from trees in a series of steps. Bleaching
agents such as chlorine, chlorine oxide, ozone or hydrogen peroxide are used
in paper and pulp production.
• Tanning is a process of converting skin to leather.
• The methods used in food processing and preservation are salting, pickling,
sugaring, smoking, drying, canning etc.
• Pollution is the discharge of harmful waste material into the environment.
• The three types of pollution are air, land and water pollution.
• Air pollution is caused by the release of sulphur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen,
carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, particulates, CFCs, and lead compounds
etc. into the atmosphere.
• Water pollution is caused by the discharge of untreated sewage, industrial and
agricultural waste and oil spillage.
• Land pollution results from the spillage of oil, leaching of harmful chemicals
and heavy metal ions, and dumping of non-biodegradable wastes such as
plastics