People in the industrialized nations enjoy not only the highest standard of living, that is,
the material comforts which are measured by the goods, services and luxuries
available to an individual, but also quality life. Quality life depends upon business and
employment, services, health and nutrition, population, leisure time in addition to
standard of living. Much of this is due to chemistry.
Chemistry enables us to design all sorts of materials: drugs to fight diseases; pesticides
to protect crops and our health; fertilizers to grow abundant food; fuel for
transportation; fibres to provide comfort and variety in clothes; building materials for
housing; plastics for diverse uses; and much more.
When we address ourselves the most fundamental question: What is the nature of
life? Chemistry provides essential information on this subject. The theories of
chemistry illuminate our understanding of the material world from tiny atoms to giant
polymers.
Everything you see, smell, taste and touch is made up of matter. Even the way you
perceive the world through your senses involves chemical reactions. With such an
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
4
enormous range of topics, it is necessary to know about chemistry in order to
understand the world around us.
Agriculture
* Fertilizers
* Insecticide
Chemistry
in
Everyday
Life
* Preservative
* Contents
* Yarn
* Dyes
Shelter
* Cement
* Plastics
* Drugs
* Medicine
* Dynamite
* Firework
Petro-Chemicals
* Diesel
* Petrol
Figure: 1.1 Chemistry in everyday life.
Almost everything around us involves chemistry. The world around us consists of
compounds made of various elements. Human body consists mainly of carbon, oxygen
and hydrogen. Our environmental issues like global warming, ozone layer depletion,
acid rain, etc., also require understanding of the fundamentals of chemistry.
1.1 THE SCOPE OF CHEMISTRY
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• define chemistry;
• distingiuish the major fields of chemistry; and
• distinguish the sub-divisions of the branches of chemistry.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
5
Activity 1.1
1.1.1 Definition of Chemistry
Form a group and enlist the activities you perform daily such as brushing your teeth,
getting ready for school, enjoying your meals, studying in the school, playing, off to bed
etc.
Now, discuss the following questions and share your ideas with rest of the class.
1. What is your tooth brush, toothpaste and soap made of?
2. Why do soaps have a cleansing action?
3. What makes petrol/CNG (compressed natural gas) a better fuel than wood?
4. Is it possible to use wires made of rubber for conduction of electricity?
5. What properties of cement, iron and stone make them suitable for construction of
houses, etc. but not for making an aircraft?
6. Why metals like gold and silver are preferred for making jewellery?
7. Why is it necessary to cook certain food items?
Chemistry is the science that deals with matter and the changes that it undergoes. It is
a study of the composition, structure, and properties of matter and of the changes that
occur in matter.
Perhaps the only permanent thing in the world is change. Iron rusts, snow melts,
paints peel off and firewoods burn. We grow up, we grow old. Living plants and
animals undergo ceaseless change, and even dead animals and plants continue to
change as they decay. Such changes fascinated people and inspired them to look
more closely at nature’s way of working.
Understanding change is closely related to understanding the nature and composition
of matter- the physical material of the universe. Matter is anything that occupies space
and has mass.
It has long been known that matter can change or be made to change from one form
to another. These changes are broadly classified into chemical and physical changes.
Chemical changes, more commonly called as chemical reactions are processes
whereby one substance is transformed into another as a result of combination or
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
6
dissociation of atoms. We can describe the transformation both qualitatively and
quantitatively with the help of chemical equations for the reaction. Some of the
examples of chemical change include oxidation of matter (rusting, burning),
fermentation, changing milk in to yogurt, and addition of water to calcium oxide.
Matter also undergoes other kinds of changes called physical changes. These changes
differ from chemical reactions in that the involved substances do not change their
identities. Each retains its composition. Most physical changes are accompanied by
changes in physical state, such as the melting of solids and the boiling of liquids. For
example, water remains H2O whether it is in solid state (ice), liquid water or gaseous
state (steam). Physical change also involves making or separating mixtures. Dissolving
table salt (NaCl) in water is a physical change.
There are two kinds of physical properties, namely, extensive and intensive physical
properties.
Extensive physical properties are the properties, which depend on the amount or
quantity of sample and therefore, can vary from sample to sample. The extensive
property of a piece of copper wire, for instance, includes its length, diameter, mass,
and electrical resistance.
Intensive physical properties are properties which do not depend on the amount of a
substance present. The intensive properties of a piece of copper wire include its
density, colour, melting point, and hardness. Intensive properties are useful in
distinguishing between different substances because they do not vary from sample to
sample.
Exercise 1.1
1. How do physical and chemical changes differ?
2. Classify the following properties of a piece of copper foil into extensive and
intensive physical property:
• Thickness • Area
• Conductivity • Specific gravity
• Solubility
• freezing point • Weight of a substance
• Smell (odour)
3. Describe importance of chemistry with the help of examples.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
7
1.1.2 Major Fields of Chemistry
The universe is just like a very big chemical laboratory, rearranging atoms and subatomic particles to produce elements and compounds. While planets are made up of
rocks which are nothing but arrangement of compounds, an atmosphere is a mixture
of compounds separated by distance.
Since chemistry is such an enormous area of science, for convenience it has been
divided into disciplines. However, the division is never as clear-cut as it might appear
to be. All sciences are related and depend on each other – they are interrelated.
All the disciplines of science share information and methods with each other. For
example, biology uses the findings of both physics and chemistry to study living
organisms. Chemistry utilizes the information gathered by physics about the nature of
matter and energy to study the properties and interactions of substances.
There are several branches of chemistry, the major branches are, Inorganic chemistry,
Organic chemistry, Physical chemistry and Analytical chemistry.
• Inorganic chemistry is the study of all the elements and their compounds with
the exception of carbon and its compounds (which falls under the category of
organic chemistry). It investigates the characteristics of substances that are not
organic, such as nonliving matter and minerals found in the earth's crust. Oxides,
sulphides and carbonates form the important classes of inorganic compounds.
• Organic chemistry is the chemistry of carbon compounds except carbides,
cyanides, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, carbonates and hydrogen
carbonates. Perhaps the most remarkable feature of organic chemistry is that it
is the chemistry of carbon and a few other elements, chiefly, hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen, halogens and sulphur. The major nutrients in the food comprises of
organic compounds such as carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, etc.
• Physical chemistry is the study of physical properties of materials, such as
their thermal, electrical and magnetic behaviour and their interaction with
electromagnetic fields. A chemical system can be studied from either a
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
8
Activity 1.2
microscopic or a macroscopic point of view. The microscopic point of view
makes explicit use of the concept of molecules. The macroscopic point of view
studies large-scale properties of matter without explicit use of the molecule
concept. Some important divisions of physical chemistry are thermodynamics,
spectroscopy, quantum chemistry, chemical kinetics and electrochemistry.
• Analytical chemistry is a branch of chemistry which is concerned with the
development of theoretical foundations and methods of chemical analyses. It
involves separating, identifying and determining the relative amount of
components in a sample of material. Chemical analysis may be qualitative or
quantitative. Qualitative analysis reveals the chemical identity of the species in
the sample while quantitative analysis establishes the relative amount of one or
more of these species in numeric terms.
There is yet another important branch of chemistry, which bridges chemistry and
biology, known as biochemistry. It involves the study of the science of the
molecules and chemical reactions of life, and utilizes the principles and language
of chemistry to explain biology at the molecular level.
Form a group and perform the following activities:
1. Investigate the ways in which the major areas of chemistry are further subdivided. You
can use reference books and the internet to augment your current ideas.
2. Discuss the principles of chemistry involved in the daily-life and share your ideas with
the rest of the class.
Exercise 1.2
1. Are the three states of matter inter-convertible? What type of change will it
be?
2. Classical, alchemical, medical and technological traditions were chemistry’s
forerunners. Identify the contributions which each of these made to the
development of chemistry.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
9
1.2 MEASUREMENTS AND UNITS IN CHEMISTRY
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• list and describe the seven SI units and their prefixes;
• write the names and symbols of derived SI units;
• use the factor-label method for solving problems and conversion to SI units;
• describe uncertainty of measurement;
• identify the digits that are certain and the ones that are uncertain given a number
representing a measurement;
• identify the causes of uncertainity in measurement;
• define precision and accuracy;
• estimate the precision that is possible for any instrument, you use in the
laboratory;
• explain system errors and random errors;
• analyze the given data in terms of precision and accuracy;
• define decimal places;
• determine the number of decimal places in a calculated result;
• define significant figures;
• determine the number of significant figures in a calculated result; and
• use scientific notation in writing very large or very small numbers.
1.2.1 SI Units (The International System of Unit)
In order to test a hypothesis, a scientist must gather data by measurement. Before the
hypothesis is accepted, other scientists must reproduce the measured data. Data
gathering and checking are much easier to accomplish if all scientists agree to use a
common system of measurement. The system that has been agreed upon since 1960
is the international system of units (Système International d’Unités). The System
International is a set of units and notations that are standard in science. It is a
modernized version of the metric system that was established in France in 1795.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
10
A unit of measurement is a definite magnitude of a physical quantity (mass, length,
temperature, etc.) that has been chosen as the standard against which other
measurements of the same physical quantity are made. For example, metre is the unit
of measurement for length in the metric system.
All measurements consist of two parts: a scalar (numerical) quantity and the unit
designation. For example, when an object is 2 metres long, it means that the object is
two times as long as the unit standard (1 metre). In this example, the scalar quantity is
2 and the unit designation is metre.
Basic SI Units
In chemistry, two systems of units were commonly used for expressing the
fundamental physical quantities such as mass, time, and current. They are:
• The cgs system – centimetre-gram-second
• The mks system – metre-kilogram-second
In the cgs system, the basic unit of length is centimetre (cm), mass is gram (g), and of
time is second (s). In the mks system, the basic unit of length is metre (m), of mass
kilogram (kg), and of time is second (s). In this way, each system defines individual
base units for each of the fundamental physical quantities. All measured quantities can
be expressed in terms of the seven base units listed in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1 The seven SI base units
Physical Quantity SI Base unit Symbol of unit
Mass kilogram kg
Length metre m
Time second s
Temperature kelvin K
Amount of substance mole mol
Electric current ampere A
Luminous intensity candela Cd
From these seven base units, all except candela, are relevant to chemistry.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
11
Activity 1.3
Form a group and perform the following activity.
Take a small piece of magnesium ribbon. Measure its mass and length. Now put it in 20
mL of dilute hydrochloric acid and measure the time required for magnesium ribbon to
dissolve completely. Record the temperature of solution before and after putting the
magnesium ribbon in it.
Discuss the following questions:
1. What instruments/equipments did you use for measuring the physical quantities?
2. What units did you use to express them?
3. What is the difference between the physical quantities, namely mass and length?
4. Which is the appropriate unit to express the time taken for the above reaction to go to
completion?
5. Explain the difference between heat and temperature.
6. Which basic SI units are appropriate to express the:
a length of a race track,
b average room temperature, and
c time duration for the earth to have one rotation around its axis?
i) Mass
Mass of an object is the amount of matter present in it. It is measured with an
analytical balance and in contrast to weight, mass is not affected by gravity.
ii) Length
The SI base unit of length is the metre (m). To measure length much larger than the
metre, we often use the kilometre (km).
In the laboratory, lengths smaller than a metre are often most convenient. For
example, the centimetre (cm) and the millimetre (mm).
On the submicroscopic scale, the micrometre (µm), the nanometre (nm), etc., are
used.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
12
iii) Time
The SI base unit for measuring intervals of time is the second (s). Short times are
expressed through the usual SI prefixes: milliseconds (ms), microseconds (µs),
nanoseconds (ns), and picoseconds (ps). Long time intervals, on the other hand, are
usually expressed in traditional, non – SI units: minute (min), hour (h), day (d), and
year (y).
iv) Temperature
Temperature is a measure of the average energy of motion or kinetic energy, of a
single particle in a system. The instrument for measuring temperature is called
thermometer. From common experience, we know that if two objects at different
temperatures are brought together, heat flows from the warmer to the colder object.
For example, if you touch a hot test tube, heat will flow from the test tube to your
hand. If the test tube is hot enough, your hand will get burned. The temperature of the
warmer object drops and that of the colder object increases, until finally the two
objects are at the same temperature (thermal equilibrium). Temperature is therefore a
property that tells us in what direction heat flows.
The SI basic unit of temperature is the Kelvin (K). For most routine laboratory work,
we can use a more familiar temperature scale: the Celsius scale. On this temperature
scale, the freezing point of water is 0°C, and its boiling point is 100°C. Another
temperature scale, probably unfamiliar to most people, is the Fahrenheit scale. The
relationship between these three temperature scales is given below:
°C = 5 ( F 32) 9
° −
°F = 9 C 32
5
° +
K = °C + 273.15
The unit for temperature in the Kelvin scale is Kelvin (K, NOT k!).
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
13
373 K
310 K
298 K
273 K
Kelvin
100°C
37°C
25°C
0°C
Celsius Fahrenheit
Boiling point
of water
Body
temperature
Room
temperature
Freezing point
of water
212°F
98.6°F
77°F
32°F
Figure1.2 The three temperature scales.
Activity 1.4
Form a group and describe the difference between mass and weight.
Share your ideas with the class.
The Kelvin scale assigns a value of zero Kelvin (0K) to the lowest possible
temperature, which is called absolute zero and corresponds to –273.15°C. Note that
the term absolute zero is used because this is a hypothetical temperature characterized
by complete absence of thermal (kinetic) energy.
v) Mole (Amount of Substance): A mole of any substance (atoms,
molecules or ions) represents 6.023 × 1023 particles of that substance. This number
is also known as Avagadro’s constant (No)
Exercise 1.3
1. The average temperature in Addis Ababa, during the summer, is about
25°C. What is the equivalent Kelvin temperature?
2. A parasite that causes trichinosis is killed when meat is cooked to 66°C. Assume
you have only a Fahrenheit thermometer. Determine the minimum Fahrenheit
temperature to which the meat should be heated when it is being cooked.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
14
Derived SI Units
People often say that gold is “heavy” and aluminium is “light”. Do they
mean that a gold bracelet weighs more than an aluminium extension ladder?
Derived physical quantities are expressed in derived SI units. Although units used to
express derived physical quantities are actually derived from basic SI units, they are
often given special names for convenience. For example, force, volume, density,
concentration, pressure, area, energy, etc., are derived quantities.
i Force is the product of mass and acceleration.
Force = mass × acceleration
 = kg × m/s2 = kg m s–2
Therefore, kilogram–metre per second squared is the SI unit of force. This
combination of units is called the Newton (N).
1 N = 1 kg m s–2
ii Volume is the amount of space occupied by a solid, liquid or gas. The volume
of a liquid can be measured by using graduated (measuring) cylinder, a
burette, or a pipette while a volumetric flask is used to take measured volume
of the liquid.
mL
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
mL
0
1
2
3
4
15
16
17
18]
19
20
1 litre
Pipette Volumetric flask 25 mL
Burette Measuring cylinder
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 1.3 Some commonly used measuring apparatus.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
15
Volume is a derived quantity in chemistry, so it is given a special unit, the litre (L). In
SI units, one litre is defined as being equal to 1000 cubic centimetres (cm3).
1L = 1000 cm3
1mL = 1 cm3
1L = 1 dm3
so, 1000 cm3 = 1dm3
The volume of a solid object with a rectangular shape can be calculated as:
Volume = length × width × height
iii Density is the amount of mass in a unit volume of matter. Its symbol is ρ.
Density =
mass
volume or ρ = 
m
v
Density can be measured in units of g cm–3, kg m–3 or g/mL.
For example, 1.00 g of water occupies a volume of 1.00 cm3 or 1 mL.
ρ =
m
v
 = 3
1.00g
1.00cm = 1.00 g cm–3
It may be noted that the density of a substance is always measured at specific
temperatures.
Example 1.1
Aluminium has a density of 2.70 g cm–3. What is the mass of a piece of
aluminium with a volume of 0.525 cm3
?
Solution:
Since ρ = m/V, it follows that m = ρ × V
m = –3 2.70 g cm –3 ×0.525 cm
= 1.42 g
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
16
Exercise 1.4
1. Ethanol is used in alcoholic beverages and has a density of 0.789 g/mL.
What volume of ethanol (in litres) would have a mass of 500 g?
2. Calculate the density of a rectangular block of metal whose length is 8.335
cm, width is 1.02 cm, height is 0.982 cm and mass is 62.3538 g.
3. A piece of silver metal weighing 194.3 g is placed in a graduated cylinder
containing 242.0 mL of water. The volume of water now reads 260.5 mL.
Calculate the density of the metal.
4. Oil floats on the surface of water but mercury sinks. Explain why.
iv Concentration: The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute
present in a given quantity of solvent or solution.
For many practical applications, the concentrations of solutions are expressed in
molarity, molality and mole fraction.
Can you predict the base unit for concentration from those derived units of
concentration?
For example, the molarity of a solution relates an amount of solute in moles (mol) and
a solution volume in cubic decimetres (dm3
), or the amount of solute in moles (mol)
and solution volume in litres (L).
Concentration in molarity = 
number of moles of solute
volume in litre of solution
Units of molarity: mol dm–3 and mol L-1.
v Pressure is defined as force per unit area over which the force is exerted.
Pressure = 
Force
Area
Thus, the SI unit of pressure is Newton per metre square (N m–2). This unit is called
Pascal (Pa) (in honour of Blaise Pascal who investigated the effect of pressure on
fluids).
1 Pascal (1 Pa) = 1 Newton per metre square (1 N m–2).
Frequently used non-SI units for expressing pressure are millimetre of mercury
(mmHg), torr, and atmosphere (atm).
1 atm = 760 mmHg = 760 torr = 101.3 kPa
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
17
1.2.2 Common Prefixes Used in SI Units
Activity 1.5
Form a group and discuss the following:
Why would it be difficult to use kilograms to express the amounts of chemicals used in
large-scale industrial quantities and the amounts of chemicals used for laboratory
experiments?
 After the discussion, share your ideas with the rest of the class.
We use prefixes to indicate decimal multiples or fractions of the base units. The
international system uses a series of prefixes to indicate decimal fractions or multiples
of various units by powers of 10. All numbers can be expressed in the form of
a × 10b, where ‘a’ is a number between 1 and 10, and the exponent ‘b’ is an integer.
This feature makes it easy to convert from one unit to another. Some of the most
commonly encountered prefixes in chemistry are listed in Table 1.2.
Table 1.2 Some common SI prefixes
Prefix Meaning Symbol Multiple/Fraction
tera trillion T 1012
giga billion G 109
mega million M 106
kilo thousand k 103
deci tenths of d 10–1
centi hundredth of c 10–2
milli thousandth of m 10–3
micro millionth of µ 10–6
nano billionth of n 10–9
pico trillionth of p 10–12
When we solve numerical problems, we use an approach to units called dimensional
analysis. Dimensional analysis was developed to ensure that our answers yield proper
units. It also offers a systematic approach to solve numerical problems and check our
solutions for possible errors.
In dimensional analysis, we carry units through all calculations. As we work, we
multiply units together, divide them by each other, and ‘cancel’ them.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
18
The key to use dimensional analysis is the correct use of conversion factors in order
to change one unit into another. A conversion factor is a fraction whose numerator and
denominator are the same physical quantity expressed in different units. For example,
100 cm and 1 m are the same length, 100 cm = 1 m. This relationship allows us to
write two conversion factors:
100 cm
1 m and 
1 m
100 cm
The first of these factors is used when we want to convert metres to centimetres and
second centimetres to metres. For example, the length in centimetres of an object that
is 8.50 m long is given by:
Number of centimetres = 
given unit
desired unit
100 cm 8.50 m × = 850 cm
1 m
Note that the unit of metre in the denominator of the conversion factor cancels the unit
of metre in the measurement given (8.50 m). The centimetre in the numerator of the
conversion factor becomes the unit of the final answer. In general, the units multiply
and divide as follows:
given unit desired unit 
 × 
given unit
 = desired unit
If the desired units are not obtained in a calculation, then we know that we made an
error somewhere. Careful inspection of units often reveals the source of the error.
Exercise 1.5
1. If a man has a mass of 115 pounds, what is his mass in grams (1 lb =
453.6 g)?
2. A piece of aluminium foil is 8.0 × 10–5 cm thick. What is its thickness in
micrometres?
3. Convert 75 ng to mg.
4. Convert 6.75 m3 to µL.
5. Convert each of the following measurements to a unit that replaces the
power of ten by a prefix.
a 3.22 × 10–6 s b 9.56 × 10–3 m c 1.07 × 103 g
6. Calcualte the mass in grams of two cubic inches (2.00 in3) of gold. Density
of gold = 19.3 g cm–3.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
19
1.2.3 Uncertainty in Measurements
In scientific work, we recognize two kinds of numbers: exact numbers (whose values
are known exactly) and inexact numbers (whose values have some uncertainty).
Exact numbers are those that have defined values or are integers that result from
counting number of objects. For example, by definition, there are exactly 12 eggs in a
dozen and exactly 1000 g in a kilogram. The number one is any conversion factor
between units, as in 1m = 100 cm, of course the number one is also an exact number.
Numbers obtained by measurement are always inexact. Uncertainties always exist in
measured quantities. There are many causes of uncertainty, but the most important are
usually
• the person doing the measurement,
• the measuring device,
• the environment where the measurement is being made, and
• variability in the item being measured.
Making a measurement usually involves comparing the item you are measuring with a
unit or a scale of units. It is often impossible to obtain the exact value of the quantity
measured, unless all the numbers are exact integers.
Activity 1.6
Form a group and perform the following activities.
1. Make a chain of paper clips or other objects of uniform length. Then use a metre stick
to measure a series of lengths on the chain. For example, measure sections containing
one, two, three, etc., clips. Record your results and share them with your classmates.
2. Using laboratory scale, take several mass reading for one, two, three objects of uniform
size. You can use any convenient objects you find in the laboratory. Record your results
and discuss them in your group. Focus especially on the similarities and differences in
your measurement. Did you all find the same reading for the same object? What do
you think are the cause of the uncertainties, if any?
Discuss the results with the rest of the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
20
Activity 1.7
1.2.4 Precision and Accuracy in Measurements
Precision and accuracy are terms which are used to express uncertainties in
measurement. Precision is a measure of how clearly individual measurements agree
with one another. Accuracy refers to how closely individual measurements agree with
the correct or ‘true’ value.
Form a group, perform the following activities and discuss each of the following questions.
After the discussion, share your ideas with the rest of the class.
A laboratory instructor has given a sample of amino acid powder to four students, A, B, C
and D. Each student is asked to weigh the sample and record his/her results. The true
(accepted) value is 8.72 g. Their results for three trials are:
Trials Student A Student B Student C Student D
1 8.72 g 8.50 g 8.50 g 8.41 g
2 8.74 g 8.77 g 8.48 g 8.72 g
3 8.70 g 8.83 g 8.51 g 8.55 g
a Calculate the average mass from each set of data, and determine which set is the most
accurate.
b Which set of data is the most precise? Is this set also the most accurate?
c Which set of data is the least accurate? Is this set also the least precise?
A possible set of results obtained from a measurement of the length of a table with a
metre stick by five students is given in Table 1.3.
Table 1.3 A set of measurements of length
Student Length (m)
1 2.157
2 2.150
3 2.153
4 2.159
5 2.156
Average 2.155
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
21
The precision of a set of measurements refers to the degree of reproducibility among
the set. The precision is good (or high) if each of the measurements is close to the
average of the series. The precision is low (or poor) if there is a wide deviation from
the average value. The precision of the data in Table 1.3 is good. Each measurement
is within 0.005 m of the average value. In contrast the accuracy of a set of
measurement refers to the closeness of the average of the set to the ‘‘correct’’ or
‘‘true’’ value.
Measurements of high precision are more likely to be accurate than are those of poor
precision, but even highly precise measurements are sometimes inaccurate.
Example 1.2
Four persons A, B, C and D used targets a, b, c and d respectively while
practicing with a rifle. The results are illustrated in Figure 1.4. How do you explain
the following results?
a Target a represents low accuracy and low precision.
b Target b represents low accuracy and high precision.
c Target c represents high accuracy and low precision.
d Target d represents high accuracy and high precision.
Read the figure’s legend and tally with your answers.
a b
c d
(The central blue region is the centre of the target)
a measurements of low accuracy and low precision are scattered and off-centre;
b those with low accuracy and high precision form a tight off-centre cluster;
c those with high accuracy and low precision are evenly distributed but are distant
from the centre; and
d those with high accuracy and high precision are bunched in the centre of the target.
Figure 1.4 Comparing precision and accuracy.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
22
Exercise 1.6
Four students measured the mass of a piece of metal whose accurate mass is
34.75 g. Their results are 34.2 g, 33.75 g, 35.0 g, and 34.69 g.
a What is the best estimate for the mass of the piece of metal? Explain why?
b Explain whether the results are precise or accurate?
The precision of a result is a measure of the certainty of the value. Usually the result
is quoted as a plus-or-minus (±) value. For example, the accepted value of a universal
gas constant (R) is 8.314 J mol–1 K–1. One student might quote a result of (8.34 ±
0.03) J mol–1 K–1, while another student gives a value of (8.513 ± 0.0006) J mol–1
K–1. The result of the former student is more accurate (i.e., closer to the true
(accepted) value), while that of the latter student is the more precise (i.e., has the
smallest uncertainty).
Precision and accuracy are linked with two common types of errors called Random
and Systematic errors.
Random error makes a measurement less precise but not in any particular direction. In
other words, the actual value may be either greater or smaller than the value one
records. Random errors arise mostly from inadequacies or limitations in the instrument.
On the other hand this may be a result of how precisely someone can read a metre or
a scale.
For example, consider the measuring cylinder shown in Figure 1.3c; we would probably
take the reading as 70.0, but in doing so, we say that it is nearer to 70.0 than it is to
69.9 or 70.1. In other words, it is greater than 69.95 (had it been less we would have
recorded it as 69.9) and smaller than 70.05 (had it been greater we would have
recorded it as 70.1); hence, we should record this value as 70.0 ± 0.05.
In some cases, such as many thermometers, it is only possible to read a scale to the
nearest 0.2 (that is, one would record 28.0, 28.2, 28.4, 28.6, etc., but never an odd
final digit such as 28.3, 28.5, 28.7 etc.). In this case, the uncertainty would be ± 0.1,
because a reading of 28.2 means it is greater than 28.0, but less than 28.4.
Systematic errors produce values that are either entirely higher or smaller than the
actual value. It always affects a result in a particular direction, and skews the accuracy
of the experiment in that direction. Systematic errors arise from flaws or defects in the
instrument or from errors in the manner that the measurement was taken.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
23
For example, when you are taking the initial reading of a burette that is placed well
above head height, you might decide to read the top rather than the bottom of the
meniscus. Systematic errors can lead to inconsistent results.
Exercise 1.7
Indicate which of the following allow you to give exact numbers when you
measure them:
a The mass of a paper clip;
b The surface area of a coin;
c The number of inches in a mile;
d The number of ounce in a pound;
e The number of microseconds in a week;
f The number of pages in this text book.
1.2.5 Decimal Places
A decimal place refers to the number of digits to the right of the decimal point. Each
successive position to the right of a decimal point has denominator increased by a
power of ten. For example, 0.087 is a number given to three decimal places, and in
0.087, 0 is the first decimal place, 8 is the second, 7 is the third.
A point or dot (•) used to separate the whole number part from the fractional part of
a number is called a decimal point.
units
1/10 (Tenth)
1/1000 (Thousandth)
1/100 (Hundredth)
Tens 28 . 682
Decimal point
10 × larger
10 × smaller
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
24
To express a value to the nth decimal place, look at the values of the (n + 1)th digit,
as stated in the following rules.
1 If the (n + 1)th digit is 4 or less, leave the nth digit unchanged. For instance,
369.648 rounds to 369.6 if we want one decimal place.
2 If (n + 1)th digit is greater than 5 round up the nth digit. For instance, 936.758
can be rounded to 936.76 if we want to express the result upto two decimal
places.
3 If the digit to be removed is 5, the preceding number increases by one unit if it is
odd and remains unchanged if it is even. For example, 17.75 rounds to 17.8, but
17.65 rounds to 17.6. Note that if 5 is followed only by zeros, the left-most digit
is unchanged. But if the 5 is followed by non-zeros, the final digit is increased by
1. For example, 17.6500 rounds to 17.6, but 17.6513 rounds to 17.7.
Example 1.3
1. Round 7.1284 to 2 decimal places.
2. Round 0.1284 to 1 decimal place.
3. Round 26.895 to 2 decimal places.
Solution:
1. The 3rd decimal number, 8, is bigger than 5, so we add 1 to the 2nd decimal
number, 2, and drop the rest of the decimal numbers. Our answer is 7.13.
2. The 2nd decimal number, 2, is less than 5, so we do nothing to the 1 and
we drop the rest of the decimal numbers. Our answer is 0.1.
3. The second decimal number, 9, is odd, so we add 1 to 9 to get 10, and
drop the rest of the decimal numbers. But, we have to carry the 1 to the 8
to get 9. So our answer is 26.90 or just 26.9.
1.2.6 Significant Figures
Significant figures are those digits that correctly indicate the precision of a
measurement. So significant figures show both the limits of accuracy and where the
uncertainty begins. For this reason, it is important to indicate the margin of error in
measurement by clearly indicating the number of significant figures, which are the
meaningful digits in a measured or calculated quantity.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
25
It may be noted that measurements that were taken by the five students in Table 1.3
agree on the first three digits (2.15); they differ only in the fourth digit. The last digit in
a scientific measurement is usually regarded as uncertain. All digits known with
certainty, plus one of uncertain value, are called significant figures.
The measurements in Table 1.3 have four significant figures. In other words, we are
quite sure that the length of the table is between 2.15 m and 2.16 m. Our best
estimate, including the uncertain digit, is the average value, i.e., 2.155 m.
The last digit in a significant figure is uncertain because it reflects the limit of accuracy.
The following guidelines apply to determining the number of significant figures in a
measured quantity. It has to be decided whether zeros are significant in three different
situations.
1. If the zeros precede the first non-zero digit, they are not significant. Such zeros
merely locate the decimal point. i.e., they define the magnitude of measurement.
For example, 0.004 m has one significant figure, and 0.00016 m has two
significant figures.
2. If the zeros are between non-zero digits, they are significant. For example,
204408 kg has six significant figures while 0.05504 has four significant figures.
3. If the zeros follow non-zero digits, there is ambiguity if no decimal point is given.
For example, if a volume is given as 200 cm3, there is no way of expressing if
the final two zeros are significant. But if the volume is given as 200 cm3, zeros
after a non-zero digit preceded by a decimal point make all figures significant.
Thus, 200 cm3 has three significant figures. If it is given as 200.0 cm3, it has
four significant figures.
4. Non-zero digits are always significant.
Example 1.4
1. How many significant figures are there in:
a 0.0004802 b 6, 834 c 5, 2100
2. A calculator display shows the result of a calculation to be 67340.468. How
many significant figures are there?
Solution:
1. a four significant figures
b four significant figures
c ambiguous
2. Eight significant figures.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
26
1.2.7 Scientific Notation
The ambiguity in significant figures can be avoided by expressing the measurements in
scientific notation. Scientific notation is a way of expressing large or small numbers as
factors of the powers of 10. The exponents of 10 can be used to make the expression
of scientific measurements more compact, easier to understand, and simpler to
manipulate. For example, the mass of an electron is 0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000
000 000 91 g, and the value of Avogadro’s number is 602, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000,
000, 000 mol–1. In scientific notation, these values can be expressed as 9.1 × 10–28 g
and 6.02 × 1023 mol–1 respectively.
To express numbers in scientific notation, you use the form a × 10b, where a is a
decimal number between 1 and 10 (but not equal to 10), and is known as the digit
term, and b is a positive or negative integer or zero and is called the exponent.
To express a number in scientific notation, count the number of places you must move
the decimal point in order to get ‘a’ between 1 and 10. Moving the decimal point to
the right (if the number is less than 1) indicates a negative exponent, and moving the
decimal point to the left (if the number is greater than 1) indicates a positive
exponent.
Example 1.5
Express the following numbers in scientific notation (each with three significant
figures)
a 7500000 b 0.000777
Solution:
a 7.50 × 106 b 7.77 × 10–4
Exercise 1.8
1. Express 0.0000000013 in scientific notation.
2. Express each of the following with the number of significant figures indicated:
a 5,000.083 (to three significant figures)
b 3,986.0 (to four significant figures)
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
27
Follow the following rules for poper answers of the results of substraction, addition,
multiplication, and division of numerical values.
1. For addition and subtraction, the answer should contain no more digits to the
right of the decimal point than any individual quantity. i.e., use the least number of
decimal places.
2. For multiplication and division, a result can only be as accurate as the factor with
the least number of significant figures that goes into its calculation. i.e., use the
least number of significant figures.
Example 1.6
1. What is the area, in square metres, of a room that is 12.42 m long and
4.81 m wide?
2. Perform the following calculation and round off the answer to the correct
number of digits.
49.146 + 72.13 – 9.1434 = ?
Solution:
1. The length of the room is expressed to four significant figures and the width
to three. By whatever method we use to carry out the multiplication, we are
limited to three significant figures in our answer.
12.42 m × 4.81 m = 59.7 m2
2. In this calculation, we must add two numbers and, from their sum, subtract
the third. We express the answer to two decimal places, the number of
decimal places in ‘72.13’. We do this in two ways below:
a 49.146
72.13
121.276 121.28
9.1434 112.14
112.1366
+
=
− =
b 49.146
+72.13
121.276
 9.1434
112.1326 =112.13
−
The preferred method is b, where we do not round off the intermediate result:
121.276.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
28
Exercise 1.9
1. Perform the indicated operations and give answers with the proper number
of digits.
a 451 g – 15.46 g – 20.3 g
b 15.436 L + 5.3 L – 6.24 L – 8.177 L
c 48.2 m + 3.82 m + 48.4394 m
d 148 g + 2.39 g + 0.0124 g
e 37 m × 2.340 m × 0.52 m
f 62.89 m ÷ 4.7 m
2. The distance between carbon atoms in a diamond is 154 pm. Convert this
distance to millimetres.
3. In a certain part of the country, there is an average of 710 people per
square mile and 0.72 internet services per person. What is the average
number of internet services in an area of 5.0 km2?
1.3 CHEMISTRY AS EXPERIMENTAL SCIENCE
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• define scientific method;
• describe the major steps of the scientific method;
• use scientific methods in solving problems;
• demonstrate some experimental skills in chemistry; and
• describe the procedures of writing laboratory reports.
1.3.1 The Scientific Method
Activity 1.8
Form a group and perform the following activity.:
a Collect a pastic bag filled with different items provided by your teacher.
b Decide on the question you would like to answer about your bag. Write it down.
(Do not open the bag)
c Guess what the answer to your question might be. Write down. (Do not open the bag)
d Open your bag and answer the questions.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
29
e Be sure to count the total number of items.
Now, discuss which part of the activity (a, b, c, d, or e) introduces the scientific
terminology: hypothesis, data collection, experimentation, etc.
Discuss the results with the rest of the class.
Science is an organized body of knowledge that is based on a method of looking at
the world. The scientific methods are unique, and require any explanation of what is
seen to be based on the results of experiments and observations. These experiments
and observations must be verifiable by anyone who has the time and means needed to
reproduce them.
Although two different scientists rarely approach the same problem in exactly the
same way, there are guidelines for the practice of science that have come to be
known as the scientific method. These guidelines are outlined in Figure 1.5.
Observations and
experiemnts
Find patterns,
trends, and laws
Formulate and
test hypotheses
Theory
Data & information
Figure1.5 Steps in scientific methods.
The scientific method is a general approach to problems. It involves making
observations, collecting information/data, seeking patterns in the observations,
formulating hypothesis to explain the observations, and testing these hypothesis by
further experiments. If a hypothesis successfully posses many tests, it becomes a
theory, which is a tested explanation of a hypothesis.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
30
Activity 1.9
Form a group and imagine/enact that you are a group of scientists who have discovered a
new chemical compound of great use in curing cancer.
1. How would you present your work to other scientists of the world?
2. Is there a particular format to write scientific reports?
Discuss the essential features of a well-designed experiment.
3. Consider the following:
a Strike a match stick to light it.
b Record all your observations in writing.
c Examine your written observations and consider their objectivity.
Which of these do you think are just descriptions of your observations?
In contrast, which are the ideas that you formed based on your observations?
Finally, which of your data could be subjective or partly subjective? Why?
Present your observations to your classmates. As you do so, describe the objectivity or
subjectivity of each statement that you make. In particular, discuss those that you inferred
based on observation.
Scientists seek general relations that unify their observations. A concise verbal
statement or a mathematical equation that summarizes a broad variety of observations
and experience is known as scientific law. A familiar example is the law of gravity. It
summarizes the experience that what goes up must come down.
Scientists also seek to understand laws. A tentative explanation of a law is called a
hypothesis. A hypothesis is useful if it can be used to make predictions that can be
tested by further experiments and can thereby be verified.
A hypothesis that continually withstands such tests is called a theory. A theory is an
explanation of the general principles of certain phenomena that has considerable
evidence or facts to support it. It may serve to unify a broad area and may provide a
basis for explaining many laws.
There is no fool-proof, step-by-step scientific method that people use. Their
approaches depend on their temperaments, circumstances and training. Rarely will two
people approach the same problem in the same way. Scientific progress is not
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
31
smooth, certain and predictable. The path of any scientific study is likely to be
irregular and uncertain. Progress is often slow, and many promising leads turn out to
be dead ends. Serendipity (fortunate accidental discovery) as well as perseverance
has played an important role in the development of science.
1.3.2 Some Experimental Skills in Chemistry
Activity 1.10
Form a group and perform the following activities. Discuss the results with the rest of the
class.
Consider the reaction between a copper wire and concentrated nitric acid. Observe this
reaction and suggest possible solutions for the following questions:
Has the copper wire disappeared?
Have the copper atoms disappeared? If not disappeared, where are they?
What are the expected products?
Is this change physical or chemical?
Caution: The gaseous product formed is pungent, irritating and poisonous; do not inhale
it and do not allow it to escape in the air.
Experimental Skills
Chemistry has two main roles in the curriculum. Chemistry is pre-requisite for many
other courses in higher education, such as medicine, biological and environmental
sciences. It is an experimental science that combines academic study with the
acquisition of practical and investigatory skills in order to:
• plan experimental activity, i.e., planning;
• carry out experimental work, i.e., implementing;
• analyse and draw conclusions from the results of experimental work, i.e.,
analysing evidence and drawing conclusions; and
• evaluate the work, i.e., evaluating evidence and procedures.
To acquire these experimental skills and investigations you should be able to:
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
32
• follow a sequence of instructions;
• use techniques, apparatus and materials;
• make and record observations, measurements and estimates;
• interpret, evaluate and report upon observations and experimental results;
• design/plan an investigation, select techniques, apparatus and materials; and
• evaluate methods and suggest possible improvements.
It is not possible to prepare an exhaustive list of skills, but the major skills that are
ideally developed in a laboratory environment include:
1. Skills in the safe handling of chemical materials, taking into account their
physical and chemical properties, including any specific hazards associated with
their use.
2. Skills required for conducting the standard laboratory procedures involved in
synthetic and analytical work, in relation to both inorganic and organic systems.
3. Skills in monitoring, by observation and measurement, of chemical properties,
events or changes, and the systematic and reliable recording and
documentation thereof.
4. Competence in planning, design and execution of practical investigations, from
the problem-recognition stage to the evaluation and appraisal of results and
findings; this includes the ability to select appropriate techniques and
procedures.
5. Skills in the operation of standard chemical instrumentation such as that used
for structural investigations and separation.
6. Ability to interpret data derived from laboratory observations and
measurements in terms of their significance and the theory underlying them.
7. Ability to conduct risk assessments concerning the use of chemical substances
and laboratory procedures.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
33
Chemistry Laboratory Apparatus
Laboratory equipment comprises different sets of apparatus, which are designed to
perform various tasks in the laboratory. On the basis of their use, these apparatus
can be broadly classified into three categories:
1. Reaction vessels, e.g., Beakers, flasks, boiling tubes and test tubes.
2. Measuring equipments, e.g., Pippetes, burettes, balances and thermometers.
3. Support and heating devices, e.g. Stand and clamp, tripod and gauze, spirit
burner and Bunsen burner.
The practical activities are intended to support conceptual development. Proficiency in
handling of apparatus is the result of continual practice.
Note: The information about care and safety associated with the use of some of these
apparatus/devices have been discussed at various places in this unit. However,
adequate information about these is obtained when these are actually used to perform
experiments in the laboratory or elsewhere.
Chemistry Laboratory Safety Rules
The chemistry laboratory may be considered as a place of discovery and learning.
However, by the very nature of laboratory work, it can be a place of danger if proper
common-sense precautions are not taken. It is your duty in law to take reasonable
care for your own health and safety and that of others working in the laboratory.
Therefore, it is essential that the students are taught what can go wrong, how to
prevent such events from occurring, and what to do in case of an emergency.
Protect your eyes
• Appropriate eye protection must be worn at all times! Inform your teacher if
you wear contact lenses.
Wear appropriate protective clothing
• Your clothing should cover your legs to the knees; shorts are not appropriate
for the laboratory. Loose clothing should not be worn because it may dip into
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
34
chemicals or fall into a flame and catch fire. Further, laboratory aprons can be
used to protect your clothing.
Wear shoes that cover your feet
• Due to the dangers of broken glass and corrosive liquid spills in the laboratory,
open sandals or bare feet are not permitted in the laboratory. Remember!
leather shoes protect your feet from chemical spills – canvas shoes do not.
Tie back loose hair
• Dangling hair can fall into the Bunsen burner and catch fire or can fall into a
chemical solution
Eating and drinking in the laboratory
• Do not taste any chemical! Even food, drink and chewing gum are prohibited in
the chemistry laboratory. These activities are ways by which you can
accidentally ingest harmful chemicals
Smelling chemicals
• Do not smell any chemicals directly!
• Smell chemicals only if your teacher specifically tells you to do so, then use
your hand to fan the vapour towards your nose.
Pipetteing out solutions
• Do not suck the solutions in the pipette by mouth!
• Use a rubber suction bulb (pipette bulb) or other device to fill a pipette.
General precautions
• Wash your hands with soap and water before leaving the laboratory even if you
have been wearing gloves.
• Know the hazards of the materials being used.
• When lighting the Bunsen burner, first light the match stick then turn on the gas.
• Know how to interpret data from a MSDS (Material Safety Data Sheets).
• Read the labels on the reagent bottles carefully to make sure that you are using
the right chemical.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
35
• Never add water to concentrated acid solutions. The heat generated may cause
spattering. Instead, as you stir, add the acid slowly to water.
• Hold your hand over the label while pouring.
• For minor skin burns, immediately plunge the burned portion into cold water
and inform the teacher.
• If you get any chemical in your eye, immediately wash the eye with the eyewash fountain and notify the teacher.
• Work with volatile chemicals under a fume hood.
• Never look directly into a test tube. View the contents from the side.
• Get acquainted with the location and proper usage of the safety equipments like
eye wash fountain, safety shower, fire extinguisher, emergency exits.
• Carry out only the experiments assigned by your teacher.
• Use equipment only as directed.
• Never place chemicals directly on the pan balances.
• Use glycerin when inserting glass tubing into rubber stoppers.
• Be cautious of glassware that has been heated. Handle hot glassware with
gloves or beaker tongs.
• Add boiling chips to liquid to be boiled.
• Point test tubes that are being heated away from you and others.
• Check glassware for stars or cracks.
• Never use laboratory glassware for eating or drinking purposes.
• Never remove chemicals from the laboratory.
• Never work alone in the laboratory. In case of a problem, you may need
another person to prevent injury or even save your life!
Demonstrate safe behaviour
• Obey all safety instructions given by your teacher or found in you experimental
procedure.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
36
• Clean up spills immediately if you know. If you are uncertain how to clean up a
spill or if a large spill occurs, notify your teacher immediately.
• Before leaving the lab be sure to replace the lids to all containers, return
equipment and chemicals to their proper places and clean up your work area.
• Know how to dispose off waste. Dispose off all waste materials according to
your instructional procedure or your teacher’s instructions.
• Remember that the lab is a place for serious work! Careless behavior may
endanger yourself and others and will not be tolerated!
• Know how to respond to an emergency.
• Report any accidents or unsafe conditions immediately!
• For some experiments, it may be helpful to anticipate data. You should always
read the experiment in advance.
Note: Additional safety precautions will be announced in class prior to experiments
where a potential danger exists.
1.3.3 Writing a Laboratory Report
The purpose of writing an introductory laboratory experiment is to give practice in
writing laboratory reports that answer the general questions:
• What did you do?
• Why did you do it?
• How did you do it?
• What happened?
A laboratory report is a written composition of the results of an experiment. It should
be written precisely and clearly, using good grammar and punctuation. Each report
must include: title, objective, materials and (equipment) used, procedure, observation,
result, discussion, and conclusion.
1. Title: Create a title in less than ten words that reflects the factual content of
your report
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN CHEMISTRY
37
2. Objective: This section states the purpose of your experiment. Be specific
about the outcomes that you plan to achieve when you designed your
experiment.
3. Materials used: Describe the substances, equipment and instrumentation that
is to be used in your work. Copy the format for this section from your
laboratory manual or from the standard procedure supplied by the teacher.
4. Procedure: Describe how you performed the experiment, and mention each
step in chronological order.
5. Data/Observations: This section demonstrates that you carried out an
experiment carefully and knowledgeably. The person reading your report
should find it clear and convincing enough to take your experimental results
seriously.
6. Result and Discussion: In this section of the report, present your results and
discuss them. Also report possible errors in the procedure and results,
including possible inaccuracies.
Include any problems that you encountered during your work. Present them
objectively. If possible suggest ways in which such problems could be reduced
at least if not overcome.
7. Conclusion: This section should be brief, as it refers back to the objectives
and considers how and to what degree they have been met. Review the
purpose of the experiment, and summarize the implications of the results