This section will help us to get an understanding of the electronic structure of the
atoms. A great deal of our understanding of electronic structure has come from studies
of the properties of light or radiant energy. We begin our study by considering the
historical development of the atomic nature of substances, and then we will learn how
the atomic theories were developed.
A theory of the structure and behaviour of atoms has taken more than two millennia to
evolve, from ancient Greek philosophers to the high-tech experiments of modern
scientists. Prior to the scientific revolution and the development of the scientific
method, starting in the 16th century, ideas about the atom were mainly speculative. It
was not until the very end of the 19th century that technology became advanced
enough to allow scientists a glimpse of the atom’s constituent parts: the electron,
proton and neutron.
Activity 2.2
In your Grade 9 chemistry lesson, you have learned about historical development of the
atomic nature of substances.
1. Form a group and discuss on the belief of ancient Greek philosophers about the
atomic nature of substances. Present your group discussion report to the class.
2. Refer to different chemistry reference books and, in group, discuss on how the beliefs
about the structure of matter evolved. Start from early historical developments.
2.2 DALTON’S ATOMIC THEORY AND THE MODERN
ATOMIC THEORY
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• state postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory;
• state postulates of Modern atomic theory; and
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
45
Activity 2.3
• state the laws of conservation of mass, definite proportions, multiple
proportions and the basis of each of these laws.
Form a group and do the following activity:
Take 1g of iron fillings and 1.75g of sulphur powder. Heat them strongly to form a new
compound iron (II) sulphide. Weigh the new compound formed.
NOTE: Perform the activity under the guidance of your teacher.
Discuss the following questions and share your findings with the rest of the class.
1. What is the weight of new compound formed?
2. Can we create or destroy mass?
3. Is there any fixed ratio in which elements combine?
4. What are the laws of chemical combination?
5. Will the molecular formula of the synthesized iron (II) sulphide be same as that
available in the laboratory?
In Grade 9, you learned about Dalton’s and Modern Atomic Theories. Here again
you will spend some more time on these theories.
2.2.1 Postulates of Dalton’s Atomic Theory
Scientific laws usually develop based on previous scientific findings. The laws that are
the basis for Dalton’s atomic theory are the law of conservation of mass and the law
of definite proportions.
What is the law that Dalton formulated based on these two laws and write its
statement in your notebook? Illustrate this law using C and O to form CO.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
46
Example 2.1
1. A nitrogen-oxygen compound is found to have an oxygen-to-nitrogen mass
ratio of 1.142 g oxygen for every 1.000 g of nitrogen. Which of the
following oxygen-to-nitrogen mass ratio(s) is/are possible for different
nitrogen-oxygen compound(s)?
a 2.285 c 0.571
b 1.000 d 2.500
2. Determine, which of the following oxygen-to-nitrogen mass ratio(s) is/are
also possible for nitrogen-oxygen compound. (Refer Example 2.1 No. 1
for required information)
a 0.612 c 1.713
b 1.250 d 2.856
Solution :
1. The given compound has 1.142 g of oxygen and 1.000 g of nitrogen.
Response (a) has 2.285 g of oxygen for the same 1.000 g of nitrogen. The
ratio of the masses of oxygen, 2.285:1.142, is almost exactly 2:1.
Response (a) seems to be correct possibility, so is response (c). Here the
ratio is 0.571:1.142 = 0.500 = 1:2.
Responses (b) and (d) are not possibilities. They yield ratios of
1.000:1.142 = 0.875 and 2.500: 1.142 = 2.189, respectively. Neither of
these can be expressed as a ratio of small whole numbers.
2. By the same method,
a 0.612:1.142 = 0.536:1 is not possible
b 1.250:1.142 = 1.095:1 is not possible
c 1.713:1.142 = 1.5:1 or 3:2, is possible
d 2.856:1.142 = 2.5:1 or 5:2 is possible
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
47
Activity 2.4
In your Grade 9 chemistry lesson, you have learned about the laws of conservation of
masss and the law of definite proportion. Form a group and discuss the following
statements. Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
1. The mass of a piece of wood before and after it is burnt to ashes is not the same, showing
that mass can be created or destroyed. Is it a violation of law of conservation of mass?
What would be the mass of products if the burning of wood was carried out in a
closed container?
2. Sugar consists of C, H, and O atoms. When a certain amount of sugar is burned in a
crucible, nothing remains in the crucible. Have the carbon, hydrogen and oxygen atoms
of the sugar been destroyed? If so, how? If not, where have they disappeared?
3. A sample of sodium chloride from Afar contains the same percent by mass of sodium
as one from Tigray.
4. Arsenic and oxygen can combine to form one compound, which is 65.2% by mass
arsenic, and another compound, which is 75.8% by mass arsenic.
Exercise 2.1
1. List the postulates of Dalton that continue to have significance (are retained in
modern atomic theory).
2. Match the atomic theory statements in part A with the matching items in part B.
Part A
I All matter is composed of
extremely small, indivisible particles
called atoms.
II All atoms of a given element are
identical in mass and other
properties, but atoms of one
element differ from the atoms of
every other element.
III Atoms are not created, destroyed
or converted into other kinds of
atoms during chemical reactions.
They are simply rearranged into
new compounds.
Part B
a Although graphite and diamond
have different properties (due the
nature of interatomic bonding)
they are composed only of carbon.
The carbon atoms are identical.
b 2H2 +O2 → 2H2O, not CS2 or
NaCl.
c There are 6.02 × 1023 atoms in
55.85 g of iron.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
48
3. How does the atomic theory account for the fact that when 1.00 g of water is
decomposed into its elements, 0.111 g of hydrogen and 0.889 g of oxygen
are obtained regardless of the source of the water?
4. Hydrogen peroxide is composed of two elements: hydrogen and oxygen. In an
experiment, 1.250 g of hydrogen peroxide is fully decomposed into its
elements.
a If 0.074 g of hydrogen are obtained in this experiment, how many grams
of oxygen must be obtained?
b Which fundamental law does this experiment demonstrate?
c How is this law explained by the atomic theory?
5. A 15.20 g of nitrogen will react with 17.37 g, 34.74 g, or 43.43 g of oxygen
to form three different compounds.
a Calculate the mass of oxygen per gram of nitrogen in each compound.
b How do the numbers in part (a) support the atomic theory?
2.2.2 Postulates of Modern Atomic Theory
Activity 2.5
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
Which of Dalton's postulates about atoms are inconsistent with later observations?
Do these inconsistencies mean that Dalton was wrong? Is Dalton's model still useful?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Most of the experiments conducted during the development of the modern atomic
theory will be presented and explained in Sections 2.3 - 2.6. In this section,
generalizations derived from the experiments are presented as postulates of modern
atomic theory.
Modern atomic theory is generally said to begin with John Dalton. Dalton’s work was
mainly about the chemistry of atoms – how they combine to form new compounds –
rather than about the internal structure of atoms. However, Dalton never denied the
possibility of atoms having a structure. Modern theories about the physical structure of
atoms did not begin until J.J. Thomson discovered the electron in 1897.
In 1913, a Danish physicist, Niels Bohr, who had studied under both Thomson and
Rutherford, further modified the nuclear model. He proposed that electrons move only
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
49
Activity 2.7
Chemical compounds are formed when atoms combine in whole-number ratios (law
of multiple proportions). A given compound always has the same relative number
and types of atoms (law of constant composition).
In a chemical reaction, the mass of the reactants (starting materials) equals the mass of
the reaction products (law of conservation of mass), provided no reactant remains.
Activity 2.6
in restricted, successive shells and that the valence electrons determine the chemical
properties of different elements. In the 1920s, Bohr’s theory became the basis for
quantum mechanics, which explained in greater detail the complex structure and
behaviour of atoms.
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
 1. Describe the limitations of Dalton’s Atomic Theory.
 2. Write the postuates of Modern Atomic Theory.
Share your discussion with the rest of the class.
2.2.3 How the Modern Theory Explains the Mass Laws
Form a group; use your Grade 9 knowledge and discuss the modern atomic theory to
explain the:
a law of conservation of mass b law of definite proportions and
c law of multiple proportions.
Share your discussion with the rest of the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
50
J. J. Thomson (1856-1940) was a British physicist and
Nobel laureate. Sir Joseph John Thomson was born near
Manchester, England, and educated at Owens College
(now part of Victoria University of Manchester) and
Trinity College, University of Cambridge. At Cambridge
he taught mathematics and physics, served as Cavendish
Professor of Experimental Physics, and was (1918-40)
master of Trinity College. He was also president of the
Royal Society (1915-20) and professor of natural
philosophy at the Royal Institute of Great Britain
(1905-18).
Thomson was awarded the 1906 Nobel Prize in physics
for his work on the conduction of electricity through
gases. He is considered the discoverer of the electron through his experiments on
the stream of particles (electrons) emitted by cathode rays. A theorist as well as an
experimenter, in 1898, Thomson advanced the "plum-pudding" theory of atomic
structure, holding that negative electrons were like plums embedded in a pudding
of positive matter. Thomson was knighted in 1908.
Historical Note
Sir Joseph Thomson
2.3 EARLY EXPERIMENTS TO CHARACTERIZE THE ATOM
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• discuss the discovery of the electron;
• describe the properties of cathode rays;
• define the terms: radioactivity, radioactive decay and radio-isotope;
• describe the common types of radioactive emissions;
• discuss the alpha scattering experiment; and
• describe the major contribution of experiments by Thomson, Millikan and
Rutherford concerning atomic structure.
2.3.1 Discovery of the Electron
Cathode Rays
In 1879, the English scientist William Crookes (1832-1919) experimented with gasdischarge tubes. When a very high electrical potential (~ 10,000 volts) is applied
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
51
across a gas taken in a discharge tube of a very low pressure (~ 0.001 torr) some
radiations are emitted from cathode. These radiations are called cathode rays. Fig 2.1,
shows emission of cathode rays in a discharge tube. At this stage the glass walls of
the discharge tube opposite to the cathode starts glowing with a faint greenish light. It
is now known that this greenish glow on the walls is due to the bombardment of the
glass wall with the cathode rays.
Cathode rays normally travel in straight lines, but are deflected when a magnet is
brought nearby (Figure 2.1b).
Cathode
(–) Anode
(+)
Purple
glow
High voltage
source Dark
region
Cathode
glow
To vacuum
pump
Figure 2.1 (a) Electric discharge in an (b) The cathode ray is bent
evacuated tube. in the presence of a magnet.
An English physicist Joseph John Thomson (1856-1940) in 1897 studied the
behaviour of cathode rays in electric and magnetic fields, Thomson established clearly
that the rays consist of negatively-charged particles. Moreover, his experiments
showed that the particles were identical, regardless of the materials from which the
electrodes were made or the type of gas in the tube. Thomson concluded that these
negatively charged particles were constituents of every kind of atom. We now call
these particles electrons, a term that had been coined by the Irish Physicist George
Stoney in 1891 to describe the smallest unit of electric charge. Cathode rays are
beams of electrons.
Perhaps Thomson’s most significant experiment was the one illustrated and described
in Figure 2.2. By measuring the amount of deflection of a cathode ray beam in electric
and magnetic fields of known strengths, Thomson was able to calculate the ratio of
the mass of an electron to its charge. If we denote the mass of the electron as me and
its electrical charge as e, the mass-to-charge ration is me /e. This ratio has a value of
– 5.686 × 10–12 kg C–1 (kilograms per coulomb).
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
52
A
–
+
Fluorescent screen
High voltage
Anode Cathode
B
C
Figure 2.2 Thomson’s apparatus for determining the charge-to-mass ratio.
In 1909, Robert A. Millikan, an American physicist, determined the charge on the
electron by observing the behaviour of electrically-charged oil drops in an electric
field. Based on careful experiments, Millikan established the charge on an electron as
e = –1.602 × 10–19 C. From this value and the value for me /e, we can calculate the
mass of an electron.
me = e e
e
m
× = – 5.686 × 10–12 kg C–1 × –1.602 × 10–19 C
 = 9.109 × 10-31 kg
In 1923, Millikan was awarded the Nobel Prize in physics for his oil-drop experiment.
2.3.2 Radioactivity and Discovery of Nucleus
Radioactivity
Radioactivity is the spontaneous emission of radiation from the unstable nuclei of
certain isotopes. Isotopes that are radioactive are called radioactive isotopes or
radioisotopes. For example,
55 226 14 238 14
24 88 6 92 7 Cr, Ra, C, U, N
are radioactive isotopes. Radioactive decay is defined as a nuclear breakdown in
which particles or (electromagnetic) radiation is emitted. Shortly after the discovery of
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
53
radioactivity, three types of rays were identified in the emanations from radioactive
substances. One type called alpha (α) particles which consist of particles that have a
mass that is about four times that of a hydrogen atom. They also have a charge twice
the magnitude of an electron but positive rather than negative. An alpha particle is
now known to be a doubly-ionized helium atom, that is, He2+.
A second type of radiation was shown to consist of negatively-charged particles,
identical to cathode rays. These particles are called beta (β) particles, which are
electrons, coming from inside the nucleus.
The third type of radiation, called gamma (γ) rays, is a form of electromagnetic
radiation much like the X-rays but of even higher energy. Like X-rays, but unlike
alpha and beta particles, gamma rays are a form of energy and not a form of matter.
Activity 2.8
Form a group and do the following. Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
In your notebook, make a table of the three kinds of radiation you have read about. Use
the given table headings for the types of radiation, response to magnetic field, mass and
charge as follows. Then fill in the cells.
Types of radiation Greek letter Mass Number Charge Deflected
Discovery of Nucleus
In 1910, the New Zealand chemist and physicist, Ernest Rutherford, who had studied
with J.J. Thomson decided to use α-particles to probe the structure of atoms.
Together with his associate Hans Geiger, Rutherford carried out a series of
experiments using very thin foils of gold and other metals as targets for α-particles
from a radioactive source.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
54
Gold foll
Detecting screen Slit
α-Particle
emitter
a b
Figure 2.3 a Rutherford’s experimental design for measuring the scattering of
α-particles by a piece of gold foil.
b Magnified view of α-particles passing through and being deflected by the
nucleus.
Activity 2.9
From a group and discuss Rutherford’s experiment as shown in Figure 2.3 a and b answer
the following questions:
1. Why majority of the α-particles penetrating the foil where undeflected?
2. Why small fraction of the α-particles showed slight deflection?
3. Why all α-particles did not bounced by an angle of 180°?
4. Based on the finding of Rutherford’s experiment how will you conclude that most of
the space in the atom is empty?
5. Which observation led to conclusion that all the positive charge in the atom is
concentrated in the nucleus?
Report your findings to the class.
2.3.3 Discovery of Neutron
Except for the lightest hydrogen isotope, protium ( 1
1H), atoms have more mass than is
indicated by the numbers of their protons (Before the 1930’s, protons were
considered as the sole contributors to the mass of an atom). For example, a
helium nucleus, with two protons has a mass four times that of hydrogen. If all the
mass came from the protons, a helium atom would have only twice the mass of a
hydrogen atom. The reason for this “excess” mass puzzled scientists for several years.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
55
One hypothesis was that the atomic nucleus also contained electrically neutral
fundamental particles.
In the 1920s and early 1930s, alpha particles were used as projectiles to bombard a
variety of materials. Bombardment of beryllium atoms produced a strange, highly
penetrating form of radiation. In 1932, James Chadwick (1891-1972) showed that
this radiation was best explained as a beam of neutral particles. These particles, called
neutrons, were found to have about the same mass as protons but no electric charge.
This discovery finally provided an explanation for the mysterious excess mass. A
helium atom has two protons and two neutrons. Because protons and neutrons have
roughly the same mass (and electrons have almost no mass) the helium atom should
have about four times the mass of the hydrogen atom. The mass of a neutron,
mn = 1.67493 × 10–27 kg, is about 1840 times the mass of electron.
2.4 MAKE UP OF THE NUCLEUS
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• describe make-up of the nucleus;
• define atomic mass;
• define isotope; and
• calculate the relative atomic mass (atomic mass) of naturally occurring isotopic
elements.
2.4.1 Constituents of the Nucleus
Activity 2.10
Form a group and complete the following table by drawing in your notebook. Discuss
your ideas with the rest of the class.
Symbol Atomic Number of neutrons Mass Number Number of
Number electrons
12C+ – – ––
– 16 – 32 18
– – 14 27 13
Pb 82 126 – –
6
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
56
Activity 2.11
In 1914, Rutherford suggested that the smallest positive-ray particle was the
fundamental unit of positive charge in all nuclei. He called this particle, which has a
charge equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to that of an electron, a proton. A
proton has a mass of m
p
= 1.67262 × 10–27 kg, which is about 1840 times the mass
of oppositely-charged electrons. Rutherford proposed that protons constitute the
positively-charged matter in the nuclei of all atoms.
Table 2.1 The three subatomic particles
Particle Symbol Relative mass Approximate Relative
in atom charge location
Proton p+ 1 +1 Nucleus
Neutron n° 1 0 Nucleus
Electron e– 0.000545 –1 Outside nucleus
2.4.2 Atomic Mass and Isotopes
Not all atoms of an element are identical in mass. All carbon atoms have six protons in
the nucleus (Z = 6) but only 98.89 % of naturally occurring carbon atoms have six
neutrons in the nucleus (A = 12). A small percentage (1.11 %) have seven neutrons in
the nucleus (A = 13), and even fewer (less than 0.01 %) have eight (A = 14).
Most elements found in nature are mixtures of isotopes. The average mass for the atoms
in an element is called the atomic mass of the element and can be obtained as averages
over the relative masses of the isotopes of each element, weighted by their observed
fractional abundances. If an element consists of n isotopes, of relative masses A1,
A2
…An
 and fractional abundances of f
1, f
2
… f
n, then the average relative atomic mass
(A) of the element is:
A = A1 f
1 + A2 f
2 + … + An f
n.
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. Are neutrons present in all atoms?
To form the picture of an atom in your mind, think of it as something like this: if an
entire atom were represented by a football field, the nucleus would be only about as
big as a lentil located at the centre of the field.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
57
2. Can two atoms have the same number of electrons but different number of neutrons?
3. Can an atom have unequal number of electrons and protons?
4. Do the chemical properties of an atom depend on the number of electrons, protons or
neutrons?
5. Why the atomic masses for most elements are not whole numbers?
6. Does an atom of zinc (Zn) have about the same mass as an atom of sulphur (S), about
twice the mass, or about half the mass?
7. Nitrogen has two naturally occuring isotopes, N-14 and N-15. The atomic mass of
nitrogen is 14.007 amu. Which isotope is more abundant in nature?
share your ideas with rest of the class.
Example 2.2
There are two isotopes of lithium found on earth. Isotope 6Li (6.01512 mu)
accounts for 7.42% of the total, and isotope 7Li (7.01600 mu) accounts for
the remaining 92.58%. What is the average atomic mass of lithium?
Solution:
7.42
100 × 6.01512 mu + 
92.58
100 × 7.01600 mu = 6.942 mu
Exercise 2.2
1. What is the mass number of an isotope of tin that has 66 neutrons and 50
protons?
2. Calculate the number of protons and neutrons for 24
12Mg and 88
38Sr.
3. Why do isotopes of an element have similar chemical properties?
4. Element X is toxic to humans in high concentration but essential to life at
low concentrations. Identify element X whose atoms contain 24 protons
and write the symbol for the isotope with 28 neutrons.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
58
5. Copper (Cu: atomic mass 63.546 mu) contains the isotopes 63Cu (mass =
62.9298 mu
) and 65Cu (mass = 64.9278 mu). What percent of a Cu atom
is 65Cu?
6. The element chlorine contains two isotopes: 35Cl, which has a mass of
34.97 mu, and 37Cl, which has a mass of 36.97 mu. Calculate the
percentage of each chlorine isotope. The average atomic mass of chlorine
is 35.5 mu.
7. Carbon exists as the isotopes carbon-12, with a fractional abundance of
0.9890 and a mass of exactly 12 mu, and carbon-13, with a fractional
abundance of 0.110 and a mass of 13.00335 mu. Calculate the average
atomic mass of carbon.
 2.5 ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION (EMR) AND ATOMIC
SPECTRA
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• characterize electromagnetic radiation (EMR) in terms of wave length,
frequency and speed;
• calculate the wave length and frequency of EMR;
• explain that light has both wave and particle natures;
• define photon as a unit of light energy;
• explain how photon theory explains the photoelectric effect and the
relationship between photons absorbed and electrons released;
• explain that emission spectra of atoms consist of series of lines;
• state Bohr’s assumption of energy of electrons in the hydrogen atom;
• explain that the line spectrum of hydrogen demonstrates the quantized nature
of the energy of its electron;
• explain that atoms emit or absorb energy when they undergo transition from
one energy state to another;
• explain the shortcomings of the Bohr theory; and
• calculate the radius of an electron orbit, velocity and the energy of the
electron, using the Bohr model.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
59
2.5.1 Electromagnetic Radiation
Activity 2.12
Form groups and discuss on the following questions. Share your ideas with the rest of the
class.
The nature of the nucleus has been known for quite some time - since the days of
Rutherford and his associates. What has been illusive however is the position and velocity
of electrons.
1. Is it possible to know the exact location of an electron? Defend your suggestion.
2. Do electrons have a particle nature or a wave nature?
3. Explain why an electron does not enter the nucleus even though they are oppositely
charged?
4. What is the velocity of an electron?
In 1873, James Clerk Maxwell proposed that light consists of electromagnetic waves.
According to his theory, an electromagnetic wave has an electric field component and
a magnetic field component. Further, his theory accurately describes how energy, in
the form of radiation, propagates through space as electric and magnetic fields.
Electromagnetic radiation is the emission and transmission of energy in the form of
electromagnetic waves.
The wave properties of electromagnetic radiation are described by two interdependent
variables, frequency and wavelength. Wavelength (λ, Greek lambda) is the distance
between any point on a wave and the corresponding point on the next wave; that is,
the distance the wave travels during one cycle.
Direction of travel
a
b
Direction of travel

+
–

+
–
Figure 2.4 Electromagnetic waves.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
60
In Figure 2.4, two waves with different wave lengths (λ) and thus different frequencies
(ν) are shown. Wavelength is commonly expressed in meters, but since chemists often
deal with very short wavelengths the nanometer, picometer and the angstrom are also
used. Frequency (ν, Greek nu) is the number of cycles that pass a given point in
space per second, expressed in units of s–1 or hertz (Hz).
The speed of the electromagnetic wave (light), c (distance travelled per unit time, in
meters per second), is the product of its frequency (cycles per second) and its
wavelength (metres per cycle),
c0 = ν × λ ...(2.1)
In vacuum, light travels at a speed of 2.99792458 × 108 m s–1 (3.00 × 108 m s–1 to
three segnificant figures).
The speed of an electromagnetic wave depends on the nature of the medium through
which the wave is travelling. The speed of an electromagnetic wave in medium (c) is
the product of its wavelength and its frequency.
c = λ × ν ...(2.2)
Another characteristic of a wave is its amplitude, the height of the crest (or depth of
the trough) of the wave. The amplitude of an electromagnetic wave is a measure of
the strength of its electric and magnetic fields. Thus, amplitude is related to the
intensity of the radiation, which we perceive as brightness in the case of visible light.
Higher amplitude
(brighter) Lower amplitude
(dimmer)
Wavelength 
Figure 2.5 Amplitude (intensity) of waves.
Light of a particular shade of red, for instance, always has the same frequency and
wavelength, but it can be dim (low amplitude) or bright (high amplitude).
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
61
Visible light occupies a small portion of the continuum of radiant energy which is
known as the electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 2.6). The electromagnetic waves in
the different spectral region travel at the same speed but differ in frequency and
wavelength.
The long wavelength, low-frequency portion of the spectrum comprises the microwave
and radiowave regions. The infrared (IR) region overlaps the microwave region on
one end and the visible region on the other.
We perceive different wave lengths (or frequencies) of visible light as different
colours, from red (λ = 750 nm) to violet (λ = 400 nm). Light of a single wavelength
is called monochromatic (Greek “one colour”), whereas light of many wavelengths is
polychromatic (Greek “many colours”). White light is polychromatic.
The region adjacent to visible light on the short-wavelength end consists of ultraviolet
(UV) radiation. Still shorter wavelengths (higher frequencies) make up the X-ray and
gamma ray (γ-ray) regions.
Thus, a TV signal, Infrared (IR) light, and a gamma ray emitted by a radioactive
element differ principally in frequency and wavelength.
1024 1022 1020 1018 1016 1014 1012 1010 108
106
104
102
100
10–16 10–14 10–12 10–10 10–8 10–6 10–4 10–2 10–0 102
102
= 390 450 500 550 600 650 700 750 nm
-ray
X-ray
UV IR
Micro
wave
Radio wave Extra low
frequancy
Visible
Figure 2.6 Regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
62
Example 2.3
1. The yellow light given off by a sodium lamp has a wavelength of 589 nm.
What is the frequency of this radiation?
2. A dental hygienist uses X-ray (λ = 1.00 Å) to take a series of dental
radiographs while the patient listens to an FM radio station (λ = 325 cm)
and looks out the window at the blue sky (λ = 473 nm). What is the
frequency (in s–1) of the electromagnetic radiation for each source?
Solution:
1. Rearranging Equation 2.1, and ν = co/λ.
We insert the value for c and ? and then convert nm to m. This gives us
ν = 
8 9 3.00 10 m/s 10 nm
589 nm 1 m
×
× = 5.09 × 1014 s–1
2. Because we are provided with the wavelengths, we can find the frequencies
from Equation 2.1. Since co has units of m s–1, we first convert the entire
wavelength to metres.
For X-ray,
λ = 
10 10 m 10 1.00 Å × 1.00 10 m
1 Å
− − = ×
λ = 
8
18 1
10
3.00 10 m/s / 3.00 10 s
1.00 ×10 m oc −
−
× λ= = ×
For the radio station, λ = 325 cm × 
1 m
100 cm
= 3.25 m
ν = 
8 3.00 10 m/s
3.25m
× = 9.23 × 107 s–1
For the blue sky, λ = 473 nm × 
9 10 m
1 nm
−
 = 4.37 × 10–7 m
ν = 
8
7
3.00 10 m/s
4.73×10 m−
×
 = 6.34 × 1014 s–1
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
63
Exercise 2.3
1. Some diamonds appear yellow because they contain nitrogeneous
compounds that absorb purple light of frequency 7.23×1014 s–1. Calculate
the wavelength (in nm) of the absorbed light.
2. The FM station broadcasts traditional music at 102 MHz on your radio.
Units for FM frequencies are given in megahertz (MHz). Find the
wavelength of these radio waves in meters (m), nanometers (nm), and
angstrom (Å).
2.5.2 The Quantum Theory and Photon
Soon after Rutherford had proposed his nuclear model, a major problem arose with
it. A nucleus and an electron attract each other, so if they are to remain apart, the
energy of the electron’s movement must balance the energy of attraction. However,
the laws of physics had previously established that a charged particle moving in a
curved path must give off energy. If this requirement is applied to an orbiting electron,
why did not the electron continuously lose energy and spiral into the nucleus? Clearly,
if electrons behaved the way as predicted in classical physics, all atoms would have
collapsed a long time ago!
The breakthrough that soon followed forced a complete rethinking of the classical
picture of matter and energy. In the macroscopic world, the two are distinct: matter
occurs in pieces you can hold and weigh; you can change the amount of matter in a
sample piece by piece. Energy is “massless”; its amount can be changed in a
continuous manner. Matter moves in specific paths, whereas light travels in diffuse
waves. As soon as 20th century scientists explored the subatomic world, however,
these clear distinctions between particulate matter and wavelike energy began to fade.
In the following sections, you will examine the theories and experiments that led to the
view of a quantized or particulate nature of light.
The quantum theory is concerned with the rules that govern the gain or loss of energy
from an object. In 1900, the German physicist Max Planck came to an entirely new
view of matter and energy. He proposed that a hot glowing object could emit
(or absorb) only certain amounts of energy.
E = nhν
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
64
where E is the energy of the radiation, ν is the frequency, n is a positive integer
(n = 1, 2, 3, ...) called quantum number and h is proportionality constant now called
Planck’s constant. With energy in joules (J) and frequency in second (s–1), h has units
of J s; (h = 6.626 × 10–34 J s)
Planck’s contribution was to perceive that when we deal with the gain or loss of
energy from objects in the atomic size or subatomic-size range, the rules “seem” to be
different from those that apply when we are dealing with the energy gain or loss from
objects of ordinary dimensions.
A Very Crude Analogy Might Best Illustrate What is Involved
Imagine a large truck loaded with about 2 tons of fine-grained sand. Let us
assume that the amount of sand on the truck is measured by a supersensitive
scale that can measure the weight of the 2-ton object to the nearest gram. With
this scale as our measuring device, the gain or loss of a few grains of sand from
the truck would be too small to be measured. A spade-ful of sand might be
added or removed with no change in the scale reading.
Now imagine a tiny little truck operated by a driver of the size of tiny ant. For
this little truck, a full load of sand would consist of, perhaps, a dozen grains of
sand of the same size as those carried by the large truck. In this microscopic
world, the load on the truck can be added to or decreased only by rolling on or
off one or more grains of sand. On the scale that weighs this tiny truck, even
one grain of sand represents a substantial fraction of the load and is easily
measurable.
In the given analogy, the sand represents energy. An object of ordinary or
macroscopic dimensions, like the large truck, contains energy in so many tiny pieces
that the gain or loss of individual pieces is completely unnoticed. On the other hand,
an object of atomic dimensions, such as our imaginary little truck, contains such a
small amount of energy that the gain or loss of even the smallest possible piece makes
a substantial difference.
The essence of Planck’s quantum theory is that there is such a thing as a smallestallowable gain or loss of energy. Even though the amount of energy gained or lost at
one time may be very tiny, there is a limit to how small it may be. Planck termed the
smallest allowed increment of energy gained or lost a quantum of energy. In the
analogy, a single grain of sand represents a quantum of sand “energy”.
It should be kept in mind that rules regarding the gain or loss of energy are always the
same, whether we are concerned with objects on the size scale of our ordinary
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
65
experience or with microscopic objects. However, it is only when dealing with matter
at the atomic level of size that the impact of the quantum restriction is evident.
Humans, being creatures of macroscopic dimensions, had no reason to suppose that
the quantum restriction existed until they devised means of observing the behaviour of
matter at the atomic level. The major tool for doing this at the time of Planck’s work
was the observation of the radiant energy absorbed or emitted by matter.
An object can gain or lose energy by absorbing or emitting radiant energy. Planck
assumed that the amount of energy gained or lost at the atomic level by the absorption
or emission of radiation had to be a whole-number multiple of a constant, times the
frequency of the radiant energy.
∆E = hν, 2hν, 3hν, ...(2.3)
where ∆E is the amount of energy gained or lost. The smallest increment of energy at
a given frequency, hν is the quantum of energy.
Example 2.4
Calculate the amount of energy (that is, the quantum of energy) that an
object can absorb from yellow light, whose wavelength is 589 nm.
Solution:
We obtain the magnitude of a quantum of energy absorbed from equation 2.3
(∆E = hν; h = 6.626 × 10–34 J s). The frequency, ν, is calculated from the
given wavelength, ν = co /λ = 5.09 × 1014 s–1. Thus, we have:
∆E = hν = 6.626 × 10–34 J s × 5.09 × 1014 s–1
= 3.37 × 10–19 J
At this stage, you may be wondering about the practical applications of Planck’s
quantum theory. Planck’s theory has within it the seeds of a revolution for the way the
physical world is perceived.
The Photoelectric Effect
Light shining on a clean metallic surface can cause the surface to emit electrons. This
phenomenon is known as the photoelectric effect. For each metal, there is a minimum
frequency of light (threshold frequency) below which no electrons are emitted,
regardless of how intense the beam of light. In 1905, Albert Einstein (1879–1955)
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
66
used the quantum theory to explain the photoelectric effect. He assumed that the
radiant energy striking the metal surface is a stream of tiny energy packets. Each
energy packet, called a photon, is a quantum of energy, hν.
Eph = hν ...(2.4)
where Eph is the energy of a photon. Thus, radiant energy itself is considered to be
quantized. Photons of high-frequency radiation have high energies, whereas photons of
lower frequency radiation have lower energy.
When a photon is absorbed by the metal, its energy is transferred to an electron in the
metal. A certain amount of energy is required for the electron to overcome the
attractive forces that hold it within the metal. Otherwise, it cannot escape from the
metal surface, even if the light beam is quite intense.
If a photon has sufficient energy, then an electron is emitted. If a photon has more
than the minimum energy required to free an electron, the excess energy appears as
the kinetic energy of the emitted electron. This situation is summarized by the equation
hv = Ek + Eb ...(2.5)
where Ek
 is the kinetic energy of the ejected electron, and Eb
 is the binding energy of
the electron in the metal. Rewriting equation (2.5), using
Ek = ½ me
v2 and Eb = hνo
results in
hν = hνo + ½ me
v2
where me
 is mass of an electron, and νo is the threshold frequency. Equation (2.5)
shows that the more energetic the photon (high frequency), the higher the velocity of
the ejected electron.
Now consider two beams of light having the same frequency (which is greater than
the threshold frequency) but different intensities. The more intense beam of light
consists of a larger number of photons. Consequently, it ejects more electrons from
the metal’s surface than the weaker beam of light. Thus, the more intense the light the
greater the number of electrons emitted by the target metal. The higher the frequency
of the light, the greater will be the kinetic energy of the emitted electrons.
Fortunately, we have equations to quantify these observations on the nature of the
photoelectric effect. Fore example,
∆E = hν = hνo + ½ me
v2 ...(2.6)
where νo is the threshold frequency, me
 is the mass of the electron and v is the
velocity of the emitted electron. The energy (∆E) of a quantum of radiation (hν) that
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
67
goes into ejecting a photoelectron out of the metal (the work function hνo) and the
binding energy gives us the kinetic energy (½ mv2). Equation 2.6 is one example of
the first law of thermodynamics.
To understand the photoelectric effect, consider the analogy of a truck stuck in
the mud. A stream of people can come by, and each of them individually can
give a push without getting the truck unstuck. A small tractor also would have
less than the threshold energy necessary to dislodge the truck. A farm tractor on
the other hand, would be able to overcome the attractive forces of the mud and
get the truck out. Larger tractors also could do the job. Some could even exert
more pull than necessary thus giving the freed truck some kinetic energy.
Example 2.5
The maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons emitted from a metal is
1.03 × 10–19 J when light that has a 656 nm wavelength shines on the surface.
Determine the threshold frequency, νo, for this metal. Given quantities:
h = 6.626 × 10–34 J s, λ = 656 nm, kinetic energy of photoelectron
Ek
 = 1.03 × 10–19 J.
Solution:
Solve for v from co = v × λ
v = co/λ
8
–9
3.00 10 m / s
656nm 10 m / mn
+ ×
×
 = 4.57 × 1014 s–1
Rearrange Equation 2.1 and solve for νo
νo = 
ν k h –E
h
 = 
34 14 1 19
34
(6.626 10 Js 4.57 10 s ) (1.03 10 J)
6.626 10 J s
− −−
−
× ×× − ×
×
= 3.02 × 1014 s–1
Therefore, a frequency of 3.02 × 1014 Hz is the minimum (threshold) required
to evoke the photoelectric effect for this metal.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
68
Note! The wavelength λo
 corresponding to νo
 is given by λo
 = c/νo
. For this example,
λo = 
8
14 1
3.00 10 m/s
3.02 10 s − −
×
×
 = 9.93 × 10–7 m or 993 nm.
Photoelectrons will not be emitted from the surface of this metal unless the
wavelength of the light is shorter than 993 nm. Remember that higher energies are
associated with higher frequencies and shorter wavelengths.
Exercise 2.4
1. List the similarities between microwaves and ultraviolet radiation.
2. How does intensity of a radiation affect the kinetic energy of photons
during photoelectric effect?
3. The threshold frequency for metallic potassium is 5.46 × 1014 s–1.
Calculate the maximum kinetic energy and velocity that the emitted electron
has when the wavelength of light shining on the potassium surface is
350 nm. (The mass of an electron is 9.11 × 10–31 kg.)
4. A laser produces red light of wavelength 632.8 nm. Calculate the energy,
in kJ, of one mole of photons of this red light.
5. Two members of the boron family owe their names to bright lines in their
emission spectra. Indium has a bright indigo-blue line (451.1 nm), and
thallium has a bright green line (535.0 nm). What are the energies of these
two spectral lines?
2.5.3 Atomic Spectra
Atomic or line spectra are produced from the emission of photons of electromagnetic
radiation (light).
When an element is vaporized, and thermally or electrically excited, it emits light with
discrete frequencies. If dispersed by a prism, the light does not create a continuous
spectrum, or rainbow, as sunlight does. Rather, it produces a line spectrum, a series of
fine lines of individual colours separated by colourless (black) spaces.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
69
The wavelengths at which the coloured lines occur are characteristic of the element
(Figure 2.7). A line spectrum that consists of only relatively few wavelengths that is
produced from light emitted by excited atoms is the unique feature of an element, and
can be used for identification purposes.
High
voltage
Slit
Discharge tube
Prism
Light separated into
various compoinents
Photographic plate
Line
spectrum
Figure 2.7 An experimental arrangement for studying the emission spectra of atoms
and molecules.
2.5.4 The Bohr Model of the Hydrogen Atom
In 1913, Niels Bohr, a Danish physicist, who had worked with Rutherford, combined
ideas from classical physics and the new quantum theory to explain the structure of
the hydrogen atom. He suggested a model for the hydrogen atom that predicted the
existence of line spectra. In doing so, he was able to explain the spectrum of radiation
emitted by hydrogen atoms in gas-discharge tubes.
Based on the work of Planck and Einstein, Bohr made the revolutionary assumption
that certain properties of the electron in a hydrogen atom – including energy, can have
only certain specific values. That is to say, these properties are quantized. Bohr
proposed the following three postulates for his model.
1. The hydrogen atom has only certain allowable energy levels, called stationary
states. Each of these states is associated with a fixed circular orbit of the
electron around the nucleus.
2. The atom does not radiate energy while in one of its stationary states. That is,
even though it violates the ideas of classical physics, the atom does not change
energy while the electron moves within an orbit.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
70
3. The electron moves to another stationary state (orbit) only by absorbing or
emitting a photon whose energy equals the difference in the energy between the
two states.
Eph = Ef – Ei
 = hν ...(2.7)
The subscripts f and i represent the final and the initial states, respectively. The
Bohr radius, denoted by ao (ao = 0.0529 nm) can be calculated using the
formula
ao = 2
r
n
...(2.8)
where n is a positive integer which is called quantum number.
r is the radius of the orbit and is given by:
r = 
2 2
2
° ε
π e
n h
me z ...(2.9)
where εo is the vacuum dielectric constant (εo = 8.854 × 10–12 C V–1 m–1).
A spectral line results from the emission of a photon of specific energy (and
therefore, of specific frequency), when the electron moves from a higher energy state
to a lower one. An atomic spectrum appears as lines rather than as a continuum
because the atom’s energy has only certain discrete energy levels or states.
In Bohr’s model, the quantum number n (n = 1, 2, 3, ...) is associated with the radius
of the electron’s orbit, which is directly related to the atom’s energy. The lower the
quantum number, the smaller is the radius of the orbit and the lower is the energy level
of the atom. When the electron is in the orbit closest to the nucleus (n = 1), the atom
is in its lowest (first) energy level, which is called the ground state. By absorbing a
photon whose energy equals the difference between the first and second energy levels,
the electron can move to the next orbit. This second energy level (second stationary
state) and all higher levels are called excited states. The hydrogen atom in the second
energy level (first excited state) can return to the ground state by emitting a photon of
a particular frequency:
∆E = Ee
 – E
g ...(2.10)
where E
g
and Ee
 represent the ground and the excited energy states, respectively.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
71
When a sample of atomic hydrogen absorbs energy, different hydrogen atoms absorb
different amounts. Even though each atom has only one electron, so many atoms are
present that all the allowable energy levels (orbits) are populated by electrons. When
an electron drops from orbits with n > 3 (second excited state), the infrared series of
spectral lines is produced i.e, Paschen Series. The visible series arises from the
photons emitted when an electron drops to the n = 2 orbit i.e, Balmer Series (first
excited state), and the ultraviolet series arises when these higher energy electrons
drop to the n = 1 orbit (ground state).
Brackett
series
Paschen
series
Balmer
series
Lyman
series
7
6
5

4
3
2
Energy
n
n = 1
Figure 2.8 Representation of the observed spectral lines of the hydrogen atom.
Since a larger orbit radius means a higher atomic energy level, the farther the electron
drops, the greater is the energy (higher v, shorter λ) of the emitted photon. The
spectral lines of hydrogen become closer and closer together in the short wavelength
(high energy) region of each series because the difference in energy associated with
the jump from initial state ( ni) to the final state (nf ) becomes smaller and smaller as
the distance from the nucleus increases.
Having made this basic assumption, Bohr was then able to use classical physics to
calculate properties of the hydrogen atom. In particular, he derived an equation for the
electron energy (En ). Each specified energy value (E1, E2, E3,...) is called an energy
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
72
level of the atom. A very useful result from Bohr’s work is an equation for calculating
the energy levels of an atom,
En = 
2
H 2
Z R
n
− × ...(2.11)
where RH is the Rydberg constant, has a value of, RH = 2.18 × 10–18 J. The number
n is an integer called the principal quantum number (n = 1, 2, 3, ...). Z is the charge
of the nucleus. The negative sign in the equation appears because it is defined as zero
energy when the electron is completely moved form the nucleus, i.e. En = 0 when
n =∞, so, En < 0 for any smaller n. For the H atom, Z = 1, so we have
En = 
18
2
1 2.18 10 J
n
− −× × ...(2.12)
Therefore, the energy of the ground state n = 1 is –2.18 × 10–18 J. This equation is
easily adapted to find the energy difference between any two levels:
∆E= hv = Ef
 – Ei
 = 
18
2 2
1 1 2.18 10 J −  
−× ×−       f i n n
...(2.13)
Exercise 2.5
1. The H atom and the Be3+ ion each have one electron. Does the Bohr model
predict their spectra accurately? Would you expect their line spectra to be
identical? Explain.
2. Calculate the energies of the states of the hydrogen atom with n = 2 and
n = 3, and calculate the wavelength of the photon emitted by the atom when
an electron makes a transition between these two states.
3. What is the wavelength of a photon emitted during a transition from the
ni
 = 5 state to the nf
 = 2 state in the hydrogen atom?
4. How much energy, in kilojoules per mole, is released when an electron makes
a transition from n = 5 to n = 2 in an hydrogen atom? Is this energy sufficient
to break the H–H bond (436 kJ / mol is needed to break this bond)?
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
73
5. Five lines in the H atom spectrum have wavelengths (in Å):
a 1212.7 b 4340.5 c 4861.3
d 6562.8 e 10938d
Three lines result from transition to nf = 2 (visible series). The other two result
from transitions in different series-one with nf
 = 1, and the other with nf = 3.
Identify ni
 for each line.
2.5.5 Limitations of the Bohr Theory
The Bohr model of an atom was successful in accounting for the spectral lines of
H-atom which indicated that he was on the right track. Despite its great success in
accounting for the spectral lines of the H atom, the Bohr model failed to predict the
wavelengths of spectral lines of atoms more complicated than hydrogen, even that of
helium, the next simplest element. It works beautifully for the hydrogen atom and for
other one-electron species such as He+ and Li2+. Bohr could not explain the further
splitting of spectral lines in the hydrogen spectra on application of magnetic field and
electric fields.
In the years following Bohr’s development of a model for the hydrogen atom, the dual
nature of radiant energy had become a familiar concept. Depending on the
experimental circumstances, radiation might appear to have either a wave-like or
particle-like (photon) character.
Is it possible that under proper circumstances, matter can behave as waves?
Louis de Broglie made a rather bold intuitive extension of this idea. Using Einstein’s
equation and Planck’s equation for energy, he proposed that a particle with a mass,
m, moving at a speed, v, has a wave nature consistent with a wavelength given by:
λ = 
h
mν ...(2.14)
where h is Planck’s constant. The quantity mν for any object is called its momentum.
The matter waves describe the wave characteristics of material particles.
Because de Broglie’s hypothesis is perfectly general, any object of mass m and
velocity ν would give rise to a characteristic matter wave. However, it is easy to see
from Equation 2.14 that the wavelength associated with an object of ordinary size,
such as a tennis ball is so tiny as to be completely out of the range of any possible
observation. This is not so for electrons, because their mass is very small.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
74
If de Broglie’s concept is correct and all particles travel in waves, electrons should
exhibit the typical wave-properties, diffraction and interference.
Electron particles with mass and charge create diffraction patterns, just as
electromagnetic waves do. Although electrons do not have orbits of fixed radius, de
Broglie thought that the energy levels of the atom are related to the wave nature of the
electron.
The unsettling truth is that matter as well as energy show both behaviours: each
possesses both “properties”. In some experiments, one property is observed, while in
other experiments, the other property is observed. The distinction between a particle
and a wave is only meaningful in the macroscopic world - it disappears at the atomic
level. The distinction is in the minds and the limiting definitions of people, not in nature.
This dual character of matter and energy is known as the wave-particle duality.
Example 2.6
1. Calculate the de Broglie wavelength of an electron that has a velocity of
1.00 × 106 m/s. (electron mass, me
 = 9.11 × 10–31 kg; h = 6.626 × 10–34 J s)
2. Calculate the frequency of the hydrogen line that corresponds to the
transition of the electron from the n = 4 to the n = 2 state.
Solution:
1. λ = 
34 2 1
31 6 1
6.626 10 kg m s
e (9.11 10 kg)(1.00 10 m s )
h
m v
− −
− −
× = × ×
= 7.27 × 10–10 m
2. We employ equation 2.13, ∆E = –
2 2
1 1  
× − =ν      
H
f i
R h
n n
ν = – 2 2
H 1 1
i f
R
h n n
 
× −      
Substituting ni
 = 4 and nf
 = 2:
ν = – 
18
34 2 2
2.179 10 J 1 1
6.626 10 Js 4 2
−
−
  ×      − ×    
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
75
ν = – 
18
34
2.179 10 J 3
6.626 10 J s 16
−
−
  ×     × −  ×    
 = 6.17 × 1014 s–1
Exercise 2.6
1. What is the characteristic wavelength of an electron (in nm) that has a
velocity of 5.97 × 106 m s–1 (me
 = 9.11 × 10–31 kg)?
2. Calculate the energy required for the ionization of an electron from the ground
state of the hydrogen atom.
3. Calculate the wavelength (in nm) of a photon emitted when a hydrogen atom
undergoes a transition from n = 5 to n = 2.
2.6 THE QUANTUM MECHANICAL MODEL OF THE ATOM
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• state the Heisenberg uncertainty principle
• describe the significance of electron probability distribution;
• explain the quantum numbers n, l, ml
 and ms
;
• write all possible sets of quantum numbers of electrons in an atom; and
• describe the shape of orbitals that are designated by s, p, and d.
Activity 2.13
Make a group and discuss the following:
If particles have wavelike motion, why don’t we observe that motion in the macroscopic
world?
If electron possess particle nature it should be possible to locate electron. How can an
electron be located?
Is there any wave associated with a moving elephant? Share your ideas with the rest of
the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
76
Bohr’s model was very important because it introduced the idea of quantized energy
states for electrons in atoms. This feature is incorporated in our current model of the
atom, the quantum mechanical model of the atom.
The sophisticated mathematical description of atomic structure based on the wave
properties of subatomic particles is called wave mechanics or quantum mechanics.
Principally, the Austrian physicist Erwin Scrödinger developed a model of the
hydrogen atom based on the wave nature of the electron in the late 1920s.
Mathematical equations describing the nature of electron waves in atoms are
fundamental to the modern picture of the atom. The wave equations that are
acceptable solutions to the Schrödinger equation are called wave functions. To obtain
one of these acceptable solutions, we must assign integral values called quantum
numbers to three quantities in the wave equation. This requirement is similar to the
requirement for an integral value of n in the Bohr equation for the hydrogen atom.
In contrast to the precise planetary orbits of the Bohr atom, the wave mechanics
picture of the hydrogen atom is less certain. Instead of determining the exact location
of the electron, we can only speak of the probability of the electron being found in
certain regions of the atom. Or, if we adopt the view that the electron is just a cloud
of negative electric charge, we can only speak of the charge densities in various parts
of the atom.
2.6.1 The Heisenberg's Principle
Discovery of the wave properties of matter raised a new and very interesting question.
If a subatomic particle can exhibit the properties of a wave, is it possible to say
precisely where that particle is located? One can hardly speak of the precise location
of a wave. A wave, as a whole, extends in space. Its location is therefore not defined
precisely. To describe the limitation (problem) of trying to locate a subatomic particle
that behaves like a wave, Heisenberg formulated what is known as the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle, which states that it is impossible to know simultaneously both the
momentum p (p = mν) and the position of a particle with certainty. Mathematically,
the Heisenberg's uncertainty principle is given as
∆x × ∆p ≤ 4
h
π
where ∆x and ∆p are the uncertainties in measuring the position and momentum,
respectively.
The above equation says that if we measure the momentum of a particle precisely
(i.e. if ∆p is made very small), then the position will be correspondingly less precise
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
77
(i.e, ∆x will become larger). Similarly, if the position of a particle is known more
precisely, then its momentum will be less precise.
The German physicist Werner Heisenberg in 1927 concluded that there is a
fundamental limitation to know both the location and the momentum of a particle
simultaneously, which is due to dual behaviour of matter and radiation. Just as in the
case of quantum effects, the limitation becomes important only when we deal with
matter at the subatomic level, that is, with mass as small as that of an electron.
2.6.2 Quantum Numbers
An atomic orbital is specified first by three quantum numbers that are associated
respectively, with the orbital's size (energy), shape, orientation and, later, independent
of these three quantum numbers, the electron spin. The first three sets of quantum
numbers have a hierarchical relationship: the size-related number limits the shaperelated number, the shape-related number in turn limits the orientation-related number.
Three among the four quantum numbers characterize the orbitals in the atom. That is,
they describe the orbital or the space the electron is supposed to occupy. The fourth
quantum number is used to describe the spin of the electrons that occupy the orbitals.
The four quantum numbers are:
1. The principal quantum number (n) is a positive integer having values n = 1,
2, 3, ... . It gives the following information:
(i) Relative size of the orbital or the relative distance of the electron from the
nucleus. Size of orbital increases with the increase of principal quantum
number n.
(ii) Energy of the orbital. Higher the n value, greater is the energy. For
example: when the electron occupies an orbital with n = 1, the hydrogen
atom is in its ground state and has lower energy than when the electron
occupies an orbital with n = 2 (first excited state).
(iii) Maximum number of electrons present in any shell (given by the formula 2n2
).
2. The azimuthal quantum number (l) is also known as angular momentum or
subsidiary quantum number. It is an integer having values from 0 to (n – 1). For
an orbital with n = 1, l can have a value only of 0. For orbitals with
n = 2, l can have a value of 0 or 1; for those with n = 3, l can be 0, 1 or 2;
etc. So, the number of possible l values equals the value of n. For a given
value of n, the maximum possible value of l is (n – 1). The azimuthal
quantum number gives the following information:
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
78
(i) Number of subshell present within any shell.
(ii) It describes the shape of the orbital and is sometimes also called the
orbital-shape quantum number.
3. The magnetic quantum number (ml) is also known as the orbital-orientation
quantum number. It is an integer having values from –l through 0 to +l. The
possible values of an orbital's magnetic quantum number are set by its angular
momentum quantum number (that is, l determines ml
). An orbital with l = 0
can have only ml
 = 0. However an orbital with l = 1, can have ml
 value of
–1, 0, or + 1; thus there are three possible orbitals with l = 1 each with its
own spatial orientation. The number of possible ml values or orbitals for a
given l value is (2l + 1). It prescribes the orientation of the orbital in the
three-dimensional space about the nucleus.
4. The electron spin quantum number (ms) has only two possible values,
+½ (represented by the arrow, ↑) and – ½ (represented by the arrow ↓). The
name electron spin quantum suggests that electrons have a spinning motion.
However, there is no way to attach a precise physical reality to electron spin.
The quantum numbers specify the energy states of the atom.
• The atom's energy levels or shells are given by the n value.
• The atom's sublevels or subshells are given by the n and l values. Each level
contains sublevels that designate the shape of the orbital.
• The atom's orbitals are specified by the n, l and ml
 values. Thus, the three
quantum numbers that describe an orbital express its size (energy), shape
and spatial orientation. Each sublevel is designated by a letter:
l = 0, is an s sublevel
l = 1, is a p sublevel
l = 2, is a d sublevel
l = 3, is a f sublevel
The letters s, p, d, and f are derived from the names of spectroscopic lines: s, sharp;
p, principal; d, diffuse; and f, fundamental. Sublevels are named by joining the n value
and the letter designation. For example, the sublevel (subshell) with n = 2, l = 0 is
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
79
called the 2s sublevel; the only orbital in this sublevel has n = 2, l = 0 and ml
 = 0. A
sublevel with n = 3, l = 1, is a 3p sublevel. It has three possible orbitals: one with
n = 3, l = 1 and ml
 = –1 ; another with n = 3, l = 1 and ml = 0 and the third
n = 3, l = 1, and ml = +1.
For a given principal quantum number, n, the total number of orbitals is determined as:
Number of orbitals = n2 in a shell.
Similarly, the number of orbitals in each subshell is determined as:
Number of orbitals in a subshell = 2l+1.
Example 2.7
1. What values of the angular momentum quantum number (l) and magnetic
quantum number (ml) are allowed for a principal quantum number (n) of
3? How many orbitals are allowed for n = 3?
2. Give the name, magnetic quantum numbers, and numbers of orbitals for
each sublevel with the following quantum numbers:
a n = 3, l = 2 c n = 5, l = 1
b n = 2, l = 0 d n = 4, l = 3
3. What is wrong with each of the following quantum number designations
and/or sublevel names?
nlml Name
a 1 2 0 1p
b 4 3 +1 4d
c 3 1 -2 3p
Solution:
1. Determining l values:
For n = 3, l = 0, 1, 2
Determining ml
 for each l value:
For l = 0, ml
 = 0
For l = 1, ml
 = –1, 0, +1
For l = 2, ml
 = –2, –1, 0, +1, +2
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
80
Number of orbitals = n2, n is 3 and n2 = 32 = 9 orbitals
3s : 1 orbital
3p : 3 orbitals
3d : 5 ortbitlas
Total = 9 orbitals
2.
n l sublevel Possible ml number of
name values orbitals
a 32 3d –2, –1, 0, +1, +2 5
b 20 2s 0 1
c 51 5p –1, 0, +1 3
d 43 4f –3,–2, –1, 0, +1, +2, +3 7
3. a A sublevel of n = 1 can have only l = 0, not l = 1. The only possible
sub shell is 1s.
b A sublevel with l = 3 is an f sublevel, not a d sublevel. The sublevel
name should be 4f.
c A sublevel with l = 1can have only ml of -1, 0, +1, not -2.
Exercise 2.7
1. Give the sublevel notation for each of the following sets of quantum numbers.
a n = 3, l = 2 c n = 4, l = 1
b n = 2, l = 0 d n = 4, l = 3
2. Indicate whether each of the following is a permissible set of quantum
numbers. If the set is not permissible, state why it is not.
a n = 3, l = 1, ml
 = +2 d n = 0, l = 0, ml
 = 0
b n = 4, l = 3, ml
 = –3 e n = 3, l = 3, ml
 = –3
c n = 3, l = 2, ml
 = –2
3. Consider the electronic configuration of an atom:
a What are the n, l and ml
 quantum numbers corresponding to the 3s
orbital?
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
81
b List all the possible quantum number values for an orbital in the 5f sub
shell.
c In which specific subshell will an electron be present if the quantum
numbers n = 3, l = 1, and ml
 = –1?
4. Which of the quantum numbers relates to the electron only? Which relate (s)
to the orbital?
2.6.3 Shapes of Atomic Orbitals
The wave mechanical picture of an electron in an s-orbital looks like a ball made of a
raised soft hairy rug (that is the orbital has spherical symmetry).
1s
Figure 2.9 a Geometric shape of 1s-orbital.
The 2s-orbital also has spherical symmetry.
2s
Figure 2.9 b Geometric shape of 2s-orbital.
Higher level s-orbitals (3s, 4s, ...) have similar overall shapes, that is, spherical symmetry.
The second principal energy level (n = 2) consists of four different orbitals. One
having l = 0, is the 2s orbital just described. The other three orbitals of the n = 2
level have l = 1. They are described by dumb bell-shaped regions (Figure 2.10).
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
82
Z Z
y x
2px 2py
y x
2pz
y x
Z
Figure 2.10 The three p -orbitals.
Two lobes lie along a line with the nucleus at the centre between the lobes. The
different 2p orbitals are referred to as the 2px
, 2py
 and 2pz
, orbitals, because they are
perpendicular to one another and can be drawn along the x, y, and z coordinate axes
(see Figure 2.10). Higher - level p-orbitals (that is 3p, 4p, ...) have similar overall
shapes.
The third principal energy level (n = 3) is divided in to three sublevels: one 3s orbital,
three 3p orbitals, and five 3d orbitals. The d orbitals are described in Figure
2.11.They are much more complex in shape than p orbitals.
Z
y x
3d – y x
2 2
3dz
2 3dxy 3dxz 3dyz
Z
y x
Z
y x y x
Z
y
Z
Figure 2.11 The five d orbitals.
The fourth principal energy level is divided in to four sublevels or subshells. There are
one 4s subshell with one orbital, a 4p subshell with three orbitals, a 4d subshell with
five orbitals, and a 4f subshell with seven orbitals. The f orbitals have complex
shapes.
2.7 ELECTRONIC CONFIGURATIONS AND ORBITAL DIAGRAMS
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• explain the Aufbau principle;
• explain the Pauli exclusion principle;
• explain Hund’s rule; and
• write ground-state electronic configurations of multi-electron atoms.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
83
Activity 2.14
Form a group and discuss the given questions. After discussion share your ideas with rest
of the class.
1. Why are there never more than two electrons in an atomic orbital?
2. When there are two electrons in an orbital, why do these always have opposing spins?
3. Why are orbitals occupied singly first before the pairing of electrons occurs?
4. Why do the electrons in singly-occupied orbitals have parallel spins?
Several questions arise when you look carefully at the electron configuration of an
atom. To answer these questions, it is necessary to know the basic principles that
govern the distribution of electrons among atomic orbitals. The electron configuration
for any atom follows the following three principles:
Aufbau Principle. In general, electrons occupy the lowest-energy orbital available
before entering the higher energy orbital.
1s
2s
3s
2p
4s
3p 3d
4p
Figure: 2.12 Increasing order of filling orbitals.
Hund’s Principle. Equal energy orbitals (degenerate orbitals) are each occupied by a
single electron before the second electrons of opposite spin enters the orbital. In other
words, each of the three 2p orbitals (2px
, 2py
 and 2pz
) will hold a single electron
before any of them receives a second electron.
Pauli’s Exclusion Principle. No two electrons can have the same four quantum
numbers. i.e. they must differ in at least one of the four quantum numbers.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
84
Note: aufbau is a German word, which means building-up, while Pauli and
Hund are the names of scientists.
2.7.1 Ground State Electronic Configuration of the Elements
The electronic configuration of an atom describes the distribution of the electrons
among atomic orbitals in the atom. Two general methods are used to denote electron
configurations. The subshell (sublevel) notation uses numbers to designate the principal
energy levels or principal quantum number and the letters s, p, d and f to identify the
sublevels or subshells. A superscript number following a letter indicates the number of
electrons in the designated subshell (e). The designation can be written as nle
. The
electron configurations for hydrogen (H; Z = 1), helium (He; Z = 2) and lithium
(Li; Z = 3) are 1s1, 1s2, 1s2 2s1 respectively.
Activity 2.15
Form a group and discuss the reason why the notation nle
 does not include electron spin
quantum numbers.
The other way to present this information is through an orbital diagram, which consists
of a box (or circle, or just a line) for each orbital available in a given energy level,
grouped by sublevel, with an arrow indicating the electron’s presence and its direction
of spin. Traditionally ↑, ms
 = +½ and ↓, ms
 = –½, but these are arbitrary, so it is
necessary only to be consistent. The orbital diagrams for the first three elements are:
 
2 1s 2p 2 2s
H He
1s
2 1s
1
Li ( = 3) 1 2 Z ss 2 1
In Li, the 2s orbital is only half-filled, so the fourth electron of beryllium fills in with its
spin paired: n = 2, l = 0, ml
 = 0, ms
 = +½.
For beryllium, the 2s sublevel is filled, and the next lower energy sublevel is the 2p.
The three orbitals in the 2p sublevel have equal energy (same n and l values), which
means that the fifth electron of boron can go into any one of the 2p orbitals. Since a
p sublevel has l = 1, the ml (orientation) values can be –1, 0, or +1. For
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
85
convenience, the boxes are lebelled from left to right, –1, 0, +1, and assume it enters
the ml
 = –1 orbital: n = 2, l = 1, ml
 = –1, and ms
 = +½.
For our purposes here, the designation of ml
 = –1 for this boron electron (and the
box we chose to label –1, in which we placed the arrow) is arbitrary. The 2p
orbital’s have equal energy and differ only in their orientation.
= 2 2
2 1s
Be ( 4)1 2
2p
Z ss
2 2s
= 2 2
2
1s
B ( 5)1 2
2p
Z ss
2
2s
1 2p
Activity 2.16
Form a group and discuss the following question:
1. What does each box in an orbital diagram represent?
2. Which quantity is represented by the direction (either up or down) of the half arrows
in an orbital diagram?
3. Is Hund's rule used in deriving the electron configuration of beryllium?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Exercise 2.8
1. Write the ground-state electron configuration for potassium
2. Write the electron configuration of an element with atomic number 10.
3. Write the electron configuration of an element with (Z = 20 and A = 40 mu).
4. Draw the orbital diagrams for the valence electrons of the atoms: C, N, O, F
and Ne and determine the number of unpaired electrons for each atom.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
86
Activity 2.17
Form a group and complete the electron configuration for the period 3 elements of
perodic table.
Atomic Element Orbital Full electron Condensed electron
Number diagram configuration configuration
11 Na
3s 3p
[1s2 2s2 2p6 3s1] [Ne] 3s1
12 Mg [1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2] [Ne] 3s2
13 Al
14 Si
15 P
16 S
17 Cl
18 Ar
Group Assignment
Form a group and discuss on the following questions. Share your ideas with the rest of the
class.
Select any ten elements. For each of your chosen elements, prepare an index card. In the
upper left-hand corner of the card, place a box like the one on the periodic table, name,
and the atomic mass of the element.
Do some research on the element and write a few sentences about its properties and
uses. Attach either an object or a picture to the card that shows its properties. For example
for carbon, you could attach a pencil lead. For mercury, you might have a picture of a
thermometer. Make a large periodic table, using your cards. Show the result to your
classmates.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
87
Activity 2.18
Table 2.2 Maximum capacities of subshells and principal shells
n 1234
l 0 0, 1 0, 1, 2 0, 1, 2, 3
Subshell designation s s, p s, p, d s, p, d, f
Orbital in subshell 1 1, 3 1, 3, 5 1, 3, 5, 7
Subshell capacity 2 2, 6 2, 6, 10 2, 6, 10, 14
Principal shell capacity 2 8 18 32
Form a group and complete the following table for the first row transition metals on your
note book
Atomic Element Orbital Electron Condensed Electron
Number Diagram configuration configuration
(ground state)
21 Sc
22 Ti
23 V
24 Cr
25 Mn
26 Fe
27 Co
28 Ni
29 Cu
Examine the electron configurations of chromium and copper. The expected
configuration, those based on the aufbau principle, is not the ones observed through
the emission spectra and magnetic properties of the elements.
Expected Observed
Cr (Z = 24) [Ar] 4s23d4 [Ar] 4s13d5
Cu (Z = 29) [Ar] 4s23d 9 [Ar] 4s13d10
The reason for these exceptions to the aufbau principle are not completely
understood, but it seems that the half-filled 3d subshell of chromium (3d5) and the
fully filled 3d subshell of copper (3d10) lends a special stability to the electron
configurations. Apparently, having a half-filled 4s subshell and a half-filled 3d subshell
gives a lower energy state for a Cr atom than having a filled 4s subshell.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
88
Because there is little difference between the 4s and 3d orbital energies, expected and
observed electron configurations are quite close in energy.
At higher principal quantum numbers, the energy difference between certain subshell is
even smaller than that between the 3d and 4s subshells. As a result, there are still
more exceptions to the Aufabu principle among the heavier transition elements.
Exercise 2.9
1. Write the electron configuration for the Co3+, Cl– , Al+, Cr, As–, and Cu.
2. Write the electron configuration and the orbital diagram of the first excited
state of sodium. (Hint: The outermost electron is excited).
3. What is the electron capacity of the nth energy level? What is the capacity of
the fourth energy level?
2.8 ELECTRONIC CONFIGURATIONS AND THE PERIODIC
TABLE OF THE ELEMENTS
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• correlate the electron configuration of elements with the periodicity of elements;
• give a reasonable explanation for shape of the periodic table;
• classify elements as representative, transition and inner-transition elements;
• explain the general trends in atomic radius, ionization energy, electron affinity,
electronegativity; and metallic character of elements within a period and group of
the periodic table; and
• write the advantages of the periodic classification of elements.
2.8.1 The Modern Periodic Table
Activity 2.19
Form a group and assign codes to the first twenty elements in the periodic table by the
letters from a to t.
The following are some of the properties of the coded elements:
1. b, g, j, o, p, s and t are the only metals.
2. p and o form amphoteric hydroxides.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
89
3. b, j, s and t show characteristics colour of the flame test for their chlorides.
4. a and r can form covalent hydrides of empirical formula XH2
, the hydroxides of l is a
mild reducing agent, while that of e is not.
5. i, c and q do not form oxides, hydrides or chlorides; their boiling points are
–260°C, –246°C and –186°C respectively.
6. The dissociation energy of molecular a is smaller than that of r.
7. f and k form oxides of empirical formula X2
O5
. On hydrolysis, the oxide of f yields a
much more acidic solution than that of k.
8. n forms an oxide which has high melting point and is an important raw material of
glass.
Identify the codeed elements and place them in the correct positions in the periodic
table, and giving reasons for doing so.
9. Discuss on the drawbacks of Mendeleev’s periodic table and the need for the
modern one.
You have studied in Grade 9 that the modern periodic table of the elements is one of
the great classifying schemes in science and has become an indispensable tool to
chemists.
Periodic relationships can be summarized by the general statement called periodic law.
In its modern form, the periodic law states that certain sets of physical and chemical
properties recur at regular intervals (periodically) when the elements are arranged
according to increasing atomic number.
Activity 2.20
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
1. Do the elements having last electron in s orbital form a family?
2. Is there some variations in physical and chemical properties of these elements?
3. Why are some elements placed out of the main body of periodic table?
4. Where are isotopes located?
5. Can the properties of a compound formed be predicted on the basis of the location
of its combining elements in the periodic table?
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
90
Activity 2.21
2.8.2 Classification of the Elements
Elements are placed in the periodic table in accordance to valence electron entering
the orbital of lowest energy. There are 18 groups and 7 periods in the modern
periodic table.
Representative or main group elements: These consist of all s- and p-block elements.
The chemical properties of the representative elements are determined by the number
of valence electrons in their atoms.
Transition elements: These are d-block elements. There are four series of transitional
elements, 3d, 4d, 5d and 6d depending on the energy levels of d-orbitals.
Inner transition elements: These are the f-block elements. There are two series of
f-block elements, 4f and 5f series called lanthanides and actinides, respectively. The
periodic table is unable to include the inner transition elements in its main frame. They
have been allotted the same single place in the periodic table though their electronic
configurations are not identical. Besides, the variation in their properties is not much.
1s
2s
3s
4s
5s
6s
7s
3d
4d
5d
6d
2s
3s
4s
5s
6s
1s
4f
5f
Figure 2.13 Classification of elements according to the type of subshells being filled.
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
1. How can the 90 or so naturally occurring elements be classified?
2. Are they all separate and distinct?
3. Is there a need to learn about 90 different elements as well as some thousands of
their compounds?
4. What could be the basis of classifying elements?
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
91
Activity 2.23
Activity 2.22
2.8.3 Periodic Properties
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
1. How does size of elements vary across a period?
2. Why are elements of Group1 and 2 called metals, while those of Group 17 nonmetals?
3. Why elements of Group18 are least reactive?
4. Define shielding effect and effective nuclear charge.
Some physical properties, such as thermal and electrical conductivity, density, and
hardness are displayed only by bulk matter, that is, by large aggregations of atoms. In
this section you will examine some periodic atomic properties like atomic radii,
ionization energies, electron affinities, electronegativity, and metallic character.
Atomic Size (Atomic Radii)
Form a group and discuss on the following questions:
1. Why the sizes of atoms do not increase uniformly with increasing atomic number?
2. Why the difference in atomic radius between the elements Z = 11 (Na; 186 pm) and
Z = 12 (Mg; 160 pm) is so large, where as between Z = 24 (Cr; 125pm) and
Z = 25 (Mn; 124 pm) the difference is negligible.
3. In which location in the periodic table would you expect to find the elements having
the largest atoms? Explain.
4. Why isoelentronic ions do not have the same ionic radii?
5. Why does the quantum-mechanical description of multi-electron atoms make it
difficult to define the term atomic radius?
6. How do the sizes of atoms change as we move:
a from left to right in a row in the periodic table?
b from top to bottom in a group in the periodic table? Explain.
7. a Why does the He atom have a smaller radius than the H atom?
b Why is the He atom smaller than the Ne atom? Explain.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
92
Exact size of an isolated atom cannot be measured because its outermost electrons
have a chance of being found at relatively large distances from the nucleus. What can
be measured is the distance between the nuclei of two adjacent atoms, and can derive
a property called the atomic radius from this distance.
One of the most common methods to determine atomic radius is to assume that atoms
are spheres that touch each other when they are bonded together (Figure 2.14).
r = d/2
Figure 2.14 Atomic radius for a diatomic molecule.
Figure 2.14 depicts a way to define the radius of an atom using the distance d
between the nuclei of two atoms on an element in a molecule. It is assumed that the
atom is a hard sphere with a radius equal to half the bond distance, 1/2d.
For example, the distance between iodine atoms in an iodine molecule I2, (I—I) is
2.66 Å, so we can define the radius of an iodine atom to be half this distance: 1.33 Å:
similarly, the distance between iron atoms (Fe) in iron metal is 2.48Å. Therefore, each
iron atom in the metal has a radius of 1.24Å.
Within a vertical group of the periodic table, each succeeding member has one more
principal shell occupied by electrons, thus, atomic radii increases from top to bottom
within a group of the periodic table. To describe how atomic radii vary within a
period of the periodic table, it is helpful to employ a new concept. The effective
nuclear charge (Zeff ) acting on an electron is the actual nuclear charge less the
screening effect of other electrons in the atom.
For example, consider a sodium atom. If the 3s valence electron were at all
times completely outside the region in which the ten electrons of the neon core
(1s2 2s2 2p6) are found, the 3s electron would be perfectly screened or shielded
from the positively charged nucleus; it would experience an attraction to a net
positive charge of only +11 – 10 = +1. The corresponding situation for
magnesium atom would be that of the two 3s electrons outside the neon core
and a net positive charge of +12 – 10 = +2 acting on each of the 3s electrons.
Similarly it is found that the net positive charge acting on the valence electrons
would progressively increase across the third period.
d
r
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
93
Activity 2.24
The effective nuclear charge increases from left to right in a period of representative
elements in the periodic table. Because the effective nuclear charge increases, valence
electrons are pulled in toward the nucleus and held more tightly. Atomic radii of the
A-group elements (main group element) tend to decrease from left to right in a
period of the periodic table.
The restriction to A-group elements is an important one. In a series of B-group
elements (transition elements), electrons enter an inner electron shell, not the valence
shell. In this process, the effective nuclear charge remains essentially constant instead
of increasing. For example, compare the effective nuclear charges, Zeff, of iron,
cobalt, and nickel.
Fe: [Ar] 3d 64s2 Co: [Ar] 3d 74s2 Ni: [Ar] 3d8 4s2
Zeff = +26 – 24 = +2 Zeff = +27 – 25 = +2 Zeff = +28 – 26 = +2
Because the effective nuclear charges are almost the same, we conclude that the radii
should also be almost the same. The actual values are 124, 124, and 125 pm,
respectively, for Fe, Co and Ni.
Exercise 2.10
1. Arrange the following atoms in order of increasing atomic radius: F, P, S, As.
2. The atoms and ions Na, Mg+, Al2+ and Si3+ all have the same number of
electrons. For which of these will the effective nuclear charge acting on the
outer most electron be the smallest? For which will it be greatest? Explain
Ionization Energy (IE)
Form a group and discuss on the following:
1. The trend in successive ionization energies as electrons are removed one at a time
from an aluminum atom. Why is there a big jump between IE3
 and IE4
?
2. Why does sulphur have a lower first ionization energy than phosphorus?
3. The second ionization energy of lithium is much greater than that of beryllium. Explain.
4. For strontium, which quantity will be greater, the difference between IE1
 and IE2
 or
the difference between IE2
 and IE3
?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
94
The ionization energy (IE) is the amount of energy required to remove the outermost
electron in an isolated gaseous atom or ion.
Multi-electron atoms can lose more than one electron, so the ionization energies
required to remove each electron are numbered in sequence from the ground-state
atom. Consider for example the boron atom, which has five electrons, two in an inner
core (1s2) and three valence electrons (2s22p1). The five ionization steps and their
ionization energies, IE1 through IE5, are:
B (g) → B+ (g) + e–; IE1 = 801 kJ mol–1
B+ (g) → B2+ (g) + e–; IE2 = 2427 kJ mol–1
B2+ (g) → B3+ (g) + e–; IE3 = 3660 kJ mol–1
B3+ (g) → B4+ (g) + e–; IE4 = 25,025 kJ mol–1
B4+ (g) → B5+ (g) + e–; IE5 = 32,822 kJ mol–1
The first ionization eneergy (IE1) is the energy needed to remove an electron from the
highest occupied sublevel of the gaseous atom.
Atom(g) → Ion+(g) + e– ∆E = IE1 > 0
The second ionization energy (IE2 ) removes the second electron. Since the electron is
being pulled away from a positively charged ion, IE2
 is always larger than IE1:
Ion+ (g) → Ion2+ (g) + e– ∆E = IE2 (always > IE1)
The first ionization energy is a key factor in an elements chemical reactivity because,
atoms with a low IE1 tend to form cations during reactions, whereas those with a high
IE1, (except the noble gases) often form anions.
The elements exhibit a periodic change in first ionization energy. There is a roughly
inverse relationship between IE1
 and atomic size.
The only significant deviations from this pattern occur in Group IIIA. Although
IE1 decreases as expected from boron (B) to aluminium (Al), no decrease occurs
for the rest of the group. As with the atomic size trends, filling the d sublevels of
the intervening transition elements in period 4, 5 and 6 causes a greater than
expected Zeff , which holds the outer electrons tightly in this larger IIIA members.
As we move across a period, Zeff generally increases so atomic radii become smaller.
As a result, the attraction between the nucleus and the outer electrons increases, so an
electron becomes more difficult to remove. In general, ionization energy increases
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
95
across a period; it is easier to remove an electron from an alkali metal than from a
noble gas.
There are two exceptions in the otherwise smooth increase in ionization energy
trend, which occur at Groups IIIA and VIA in period 2 (at B and at O) and in
period 3 (at Al and at S). The first deviation occurs because the np sublevel is
higher in energy than the ns sublevel. The second deviation occurs because the
np4 electron occupies the same orbital as another np electron, the first such
pairing, so electron repulsions raise the orbital energy. Removing this electron
relieves the repulsions and leaves a stable, half-filled np sublevel; thus the fourth
p electron is pulled off more easily.
For the representative elements, removing a core electron requires much more energy
compared to removing a valence electron.
Group Assignment
Form a group and discuss on the following questions. Share your ideas with the rest of the
class.
Plot the first ionization energy of the first 18 elements against atomic number. On the
same graph, make a plot of the second ionization energy of the first 18 elements. Consult
chemistry books for the required information.
Is second IE less than first IE for an element?
Compare the second IE values of sodium and magnesium. First ionizat ion energy, kJ/ mol
Atomic no.
Li Na Al
Zn
Kr
Ga
Rb
Cd
In
Cs
Xe
Ti
Rn
Fr
Ar
Ne
He 2500
2000
1500
1000
500
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Figure 2.15 A graph of first ionization energy versus atomic number.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
96
Example 2.8
Explain the irregularities in the trends across periods.
1. Boron, with Z = 5 and the electron configuration 1s22s22p1, has smaller
first ionization energy (801 kJ mol–1) than does beryllium (Z = 4), which
has the electron configuration 1s22s2 and IE1 = 900 kJ mol–1.
Solution: The 2p electron of boron is at a higher energy than the 2s
electron of beryllium and is therefore easier to remove. This kind of
discontinuity occurs generally in proceeding from a Group IIA or Group IIB
elements to a Group IIIA element.
2. IE1 values for nitrogen ([He]2s22px
1 py
1pz
1) is higher than oxygen
([He]2s22px
2py
1pz
1).
Solution: The observed IE1 values are 1314 kJ/mol for oxygen and 1402
kJ/mol for nitrogen. In 2p orbitals, the repulsion between the paired
electrons in the 2px orbital of oxygen makes the removal of one of those
electrons easier to accomplish than the removal of an unpaired electron
from the half-occupied 2p orbital of nitrogen.
Table 2.3 Ionization energies of some selected elements (in kJ mol–1)
IA IIA IIIA IVA VA VIA VIIA VIIIA
Li Be B C N O F Ne
IE1 520 900 801 1086 1402 1314 1681 2081
IE2 7298 1757
Na Mg
IE1 496 738
IE2 4562 1451
K Ca
IE1 419 590
IE2 3059 1145
Rb Sr
IE1 403 550
IE2 2633 1064
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
97
Exercise 2.11
1. Use the third period of the periodic table as an example to illustrate change in
the first ionization energies of the elements as we move from left to right.
Explain the trend.
2. Ionization energy measurements are usually carried out with atoms in the
gaseous state. Why?
3. The first and second ionization energies of K are 419 kJ mol–1 and 3052 kJ
mol–1 and those of Ca are 590 kJ mol–1 and 1145 kJ mol–1, respectively,
compare their value and comment on the differences.
4. Why does potassium have a lower first ionization than lithium?
5. Based on their positions in the periodic table, predict which atom of the
following pairs will have larger first ionization energy:
a Ga, Ge b Br, Sb c K, Cr, d Mg, Sr e O, Ne
Electron Affinity (EA)
Ionization energy refers to the process of forming a gaseous positive ion from a
gaseous atom. The corresponding atomic property for the formation of a gaseous
negative ion is electron affinity, the energy change that occurs when an electron is
added to a gaseous atom or ion.
An electron approaching a neutral atom experiences an attraction for the positively
charged nucleus. Repulsion of the incoming electron by electrons already present in
the atom tends to offset this attraction. Still, in many cases the incoming electron is
absorbed by the atom and energy is evolved as in the process:
F (g) + e– → F– (g); EA = –328 kJ mol–1
When a fluorine atom gains an electron, energy is given off. The process is exothermic
and the electron affinity is therefore a negative quantity.
Activity 2.25
Form a group and discuss on the following:
1. By using electron configurations, explain why the electron affinity of F is negative
value whereas the electron affinity of Ne is a positive value.
2. Which group of elements has electron affinities with the largest negative values?
Explain why.
3. Silicon has an electron affinity of –134 kJ/mol. The electron affinity of phosphorus is
–72 kJ/mol. Give a plausible reason for this difference.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
98
Table 2.4 Electron affinities of some selected elements (in kJ mol–1)
IA IIA IIIA IVA VA VIA VIIA VIIIA
Li Be B C N O F Ne
–60 0 –27 –154 –7 –141 –328 –
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl
–53 0 -44 –20 –200 –200 –349
K Ca Ga Ge As Se Br
–48 0 –36 –116 –195 –195 324
Rs Sr In Sn Sb Te I
–46 0 –34 –121 –190 –190 –295
Cs Bi Po At
–47 –183 –270 –270
Table 2.4 lists several electron affinity values but we observe fewer clear-cut trends
and more irregularities than in the Table 2.3, listing the ionization energies of some
elements. The given information suggest a rough correlation between electron affinity
and atomic size. Smaller an atom, more negative is its electron affinity. The smaller
the atom the closer an added electron can approach the atomic nucleus and the more
strongly it is attracted to the nucleus. This certainly seems to be the case for the
Group IA elements, for Group VIA from S to Po and for Group VIIA from Cl to At.
The first row elements present some problems. The electron affinity of O is not as
negative as that of S, nor is that of F as negative as that of Cl. Here it may be that
electron repulsions in the small compact atoms keep the added electron from being
tightly bound as we might expect.
In most cases, the added electron goes into an energy sublevel that is already partly
filled. For the Group IIA and VIIIA atoms, however, the added electron would be
required to enter a significantly higher energy level, the np level for the Group IIA
atoms and the s level for the next principal level for the Group VIIIA atoms. In these
cases a stable anion does not form.
As the stepwise loss of multiple electrons in the formation of positive ions has been
described, in the same manner, the stepwise addition of electrons in anion formation
can be described, and we can write a separate electron affinity for each step. For
oxygen atom, it can be written as:
O(g) + e– → O– (g); EA1 = –141 kJ mol–1
O–(g) + 1e– → O2–(g); EA2 = +744 kJ mol–1
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
99
Activity 2.26
Form a group and discuss the possible reasons why EA2
 is a positive quantity for oxygen
atom.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Electronegativity
Atoms of the elements in the upper right of the periodic table (small, non-metal atoms)
attract bonding electrons most strongly. Therefore, they have the greatest
electronegativities. Atoms of the elements to the left side of the table (large, metal
atoms) have a weaker hold on electrons. They have the smallest electronegativities.
On an electronegativity scale devised by Linus Pauling, the most non-metallic and
hence most electronegative element, fluorine, is assigned a value of 4.0. Typical active
metals have electronegativities of about 1.0 or less.
Within a period of the periodic table, elements become more electronegative from left
to right. In the second period, the trend is regular.
Li Be B C N O F
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
That is, it increases by about 0.5 per element as we move from lithium at the far left
to fluorine at the far right. In other periods the trend is in the same direction but less
regular;
Na Mg Al Si P S Cl
0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.5 3.0
Within a group, electronegativity decreases from top to bottom. Chlorine is less
electronegative than fluorine and sulphur is less electronegative than oxygen. A
comparison of electronegativities is not quite straight forward when considering two
elements that are neither in the same period nor in the same group.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
100
Form a group and discuss on the following:
1. What is the electronegativtiy of an atom? How is it different from electron affinity?
Discuss in groups.
2. In a given family of the periodic table, what is the general relationship between
electronegativity and size?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Metallic Character
Activity 2.27
Activity 2.28
Form a group and summarize the trend in metallic character as a function of position in
the periodic table. Is it the same as the trend observed for atomic size and Ionization
energy?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Metallic character refers to the chemical properties associated with elements classified
as metals. These properties arise from the elements ability to lose electrons. As one
moves across a period from left to right in the periodic table, the metallic character
decreases, as atoms are more likely to gain electrons to fill their valance shell rather
than to lose them to remove the shell. Down a group, the metallic character increases,
due to the lesser attraction from the nucleus to the valence electrons.
2.8.4 Advantages of Periodic Classification of the Elements
Activity 2.29
Form a group and discuss the following:
a In which region of the periodic table do you locate metals?
b In which region are the elements with general electronic configuration of ns2
p5
located? Give group number.
c Write group number and period of an element with atomic number 34.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
101
d Is an element with the electronic configuration 1s2
 2s2 2p6
 3s1 a metal or a non- metal?
Will it form a cation or an anion readily? Give appropriate reason.
e An element is located in Group 18 and 2nd Period of the modern periodic table. On
the basis of this information predict the reactivity of the element.
f An element X of 3rd Period has very low IE1
 and largest size in the period. Specify
possible group numbers.
Some of the advantages of periodic classification of elements are:
1. The classification of elements is based on the atomic number, which is a
fundamental property of an element.
2. The reason for placing isotopes at one place is justified as the classification is on
the basis of atomic number.
3. It explains the periodicity of the properties of the elements and relates them to
their electronic configurations.
4. The position of the elements that were misfits on the basis of mass number
(anomalous pairs like argon and potassium) could be justified on the basis of
atomic number.
5. The lanthanides and actinides are placed separately at the bottom of the periodic
table.
6. The table is simple, systematic and easy way for remembering the properties of
various elements as it is based on the electronic configuration.
Unit Summary
• Cathode rays (electrons) are produced when electricity passes through
evacuated tubes. X-rays form when cathode rays strike matter.
• Radioactivity is the emission of radiation by unstable nuclei, and the most
common types of radiations are alpha (α) particles, beta (β) particles
and gamma (γ) rays. Alpha particles are helium nuclei; beta particles are
electrons; and gamma rays are high frequency electromagnetic radiation
similar to X-rays.
• Rutherford's atomic model is that of a very small positively charged
nucleus and extra-nuclear electrons. The nucleus consists of protons and
neutrons and contains practically all the mass of an atom. Atomic masses
and relative abundances of the isotopes of an element can be established
by mass spectrometry. The atomic mass of the element is the average of
these mass numbers based on their percentage abundances.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
102
• Electromagnetic radiation is the transmission of electric and magnetic
fields as a wave motion. The waves are characterized by their velocity in
a medium: c = νλ. A light source that emits an essentially unbroken
series of wavelength components has a continuous spectrum. Only a
discrete set of wavelength components is present in the emission spectrum
of an atom.
• Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric effect views light as packets of
energy called photons. The energy of the photon (Eph) is given by the
expression E = hν where h is Planck's constant.
• Bohr's theory requires the electron in a hydrogen atom to be in one of a
discrete set of energy levels. The fall of an electron from a higher to a
lower energy level releases a discrete amount of energy as a photon of
light with a characteristic frequency.
• Bohr's theory accounts for the observed atomic spectrum of hydrogen
atom.
• The electron in a hydrogen atom can be viewed as a matter-wave
enveloping the nucleus. The matter-wave is represented by a wave
equation, and solutions of the wave equation are wave functions. Each
wavefunction is characterized by the value of four quantum numbers: the
principal quantum number, n; the angular momentum quantum number l;
the magnetic quantum number, ml; and the spin quantum number, ms.
Wave functions with acceptable values of the three are called atomic
orbitals. An orbital describes a region in an atom that has a high
probability of containing an electron or a high electron change density.
Orbitals with the same value of n are in the same principal energy level
or principal shell. Those with the same value of n and of l are in the
same sublevel or subshell. The shapes associated with orbitals depend on
the value of l. Thus, the s orbital (l = 0) is spherical and the p orbital
(l = 1) is dumbbell-shaped.
• The n, l and ml
 quantum numbers define an orbital, but a fourth
quantum number is also required to characterize an electron in an orbital
- the spin quantum number, ms. This quantum number may have either of
two values: +½ or –½.
• The wave mechanical treatment of the hydrogen atom can be extended to
multi-electron atoms, but with this essential difference: principal energy
levels are (i) lower than those of the hydrogen atom and (ii) split, that is,
having different energies for the different subshells.
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND THE PERIODIC TABLE
103
• Electron configuration refers to the distribution of electrons among
orbitals in an atom. Introduced here are the subshell notations (or "s,p,d,
f") and the orbital diagram. Key ideas required to write a probable
electron configuration are: (i) electrons tend to occupy the lowest energy
orbitals available; (ii) no two electrons in an atom can have all four
quantum numbers alike; and (iii) where ever possible, electrons occupy
orbitals singly rather than in pairs.
• The Aufbau principle describes a hypothetical process of building up one
atom from the atom of preceding atomic number. With this principle and
the idea cited above, it is possible to predict probable electron
configurations for many of the elements. In the Aufbau process, electrons
are added to the s or p subshell of highest principal quantum number in
the representative or main group elements. In transition elements,
electrons go into the d subshell of the second last shell, and in the inner
transition elements, into the f subshell of the third last shell.
• Elements with similar valence-shell electron configurations fall in the
same group of the periodic table. For A-group elements, the group
number corresponds to the number of electrons in the principal shell of
highest quantum number. The period number is the same as the highest
number of principal shell containing electrons (the outer shell). The
division of the periodic table into s, p, d and f blocks greatly assists in
the assignment of probable electron configurations.
• Certain atomic properties vary periodically, when atoms are considered in
terms of increasing atomic number. The properties and trends considered
in this unit are those of atomic radius, ionic radius, ionization energy and
electron affinity. Values of these atomic properties strongly influence
physical and chemical properties of the elements