Almost everything a person sees or touches in daily life, like the air we breathe, the
food we eat, the clothes we wear, are the result of chemical bonds. The concept of
chemical bonding lies at the very core of chemistry; it is what enables about little over
one hundred elements to form millions of known chemical substances that make up
our physical world.
In Grade 9, you have learned about chemical bonding and its types such as ionic,
covalent and metallic bonding and their characteristics. In this unit, we will discuss
some new concepts about chemical bonding, like molecular geometry, theories of
chemical bonding and much more.
Activity 3.1
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
1. Why do atoms readily combine to form molecules?
2. Why molecules are more stable than free atoms?
3. What keeps the atoms together in a molecule?
4. Why do elements combine in certain fixed ratio?
5. The following diagram shows how energy varies as two H atoms approach each other
to form H2. Interpret the diagram to show the decrease in potential energy favouring
bonding.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
112
Activity 3.2
1
2
3
4
4 3 2 1
– 100
– 200
– 300
– 400
– 432
– 500
74 100 200
( ) H bond length 2
Internuclear distance (pm)
Potential energy (kJ/mol)
0
(
)
H bond
energy
2
Figure 3.1 Energy diagram for hydrogen molecule.
3.1.1 Octet Rule
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. Why some atoms are very reluctant to combine with other atoms and exist as single
atoms?
2. Is there any thing common amongst these atoms?
3. What is special about these atoms with respect to their electronic configuration?
4. What is the common name for this group of elements?
5. What is the reason for their stability?
6. Atoms lose or gain electrons not merly to satisfy the octet rule but to reach a lower
energy state in an ionic compound. But it is in reaching this lower energy state that
they often tend to follow the octet rule. Explain.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
You have studied in your earlier classes that noble gases have very stable electron
arrangements such as 2; 2, 8; 2, 8, 8 and their outer shells are fully saturated. The
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
113
first three are shown in Figure 3.2 and explains why noble gases are so reluctant to
form compounds with other elements.
Helium(2)2
Neon(10)2.8
Ar (18)2,8.8
He Ne Ar
Figure 3.2 First three noble gases.
The noble gases have very stable electron configuration, as reflected by their high
ionization energies, low electron affinity and general lack of reactivity. Because all
noble gases (except He) have eight valence electrons, many atoms undergoing
reaction also attain eight valence electrons. The ns2np6 electron configuration of the
valence shell of all noble gas (except Helium) atoms, is commonly called an octet of
electrons. The octet rule, a useful generalization that applies to all types of bonding
which states that when atoms bond, they lose, gain or share electrons to attain the
electronic configuration ns2np6 of the nearest noble gas. Nearly every main-group
monoatomic ion has a filled outer level of electrons (either two or eight), the same
number as in the nearest noble gas.
Compounds such as CH4 and NH3 obey octet rule, whereas others like BeCl2, BF3,
SF6, PCl3 and PCl5 though stable, but do not obey octet rule. Such compounds are
exceptions to the octet rule. In such compounds the central atom is either short of
electrons or has excess of electrons as compared to the octet. These are discussed
later in this unit. Though there are certain exceptions to the octet rule, yet it provides
us a useful framework for introducing many important concepts of bonding.
Note! Octet rule states that during the formation of a chemical compound, each atom
has an octet (8) electrons in its highest occupied energy level by gaining, losing, or
sharing electrons.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
114
3.1.2 Types of Chemical Bonding
In Grade 9 you have learnt in details what exactly is a chemical bond? The forces of
attraction that hold atoms together are called chemical bonds. Broadly these forces of
attraction can be categorised as intramolecular forces, which affect the chemical
properties of the species.
There are three main types of chemical bonds – covalent, ionic and metallic bonds. In
general, there is a gradual change from more metallic to more non-metallic property
when moving from left to right across a period and when moving from bottom to top
within a group. Three types of bonding can result from the manner in which the atoms
can combine:
Ionic Bonding is formed by electron transfer from a metal to a non-metal with
different electronegativity values.
Covalent Bonding is formed as a result of electron sharing between two non-metals. If
the electronegativity values are very similar then it is non-polar covalent bonding but if
the electronegativity values are much different, then it is a polar covalent bonding.
Metallic Bonding refers to the interaction between the delocalised electrons and the
metal nuclei.
Activity 3.3
Form a group and:
1. Illustrate the formation of ionic bond between the elements from Group IA, period 2
and Group VIIA and period 3. Correlate this bonding with the electronic configuration.
2. Indicate whether each of the following formulas is a likely formula for a stable ionic
compound, and give explanation for your answer:
a Rb2O b BaCl c MgF3 d ScBr3 e Na3N
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
3.2 IONIC BONDING
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• define ionic bonding;
• use Lewis electron dot symbols to depict main group elements;
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
115
Activity 3.4
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
1. What types of elements are involved in ionic bonding?
2. What is ionization energy?
3. What role does electron affinity play in the formation of an ionic bond?
4. How many ionic bonds will result from the combination of magnesium and chlorine?
5. What type of bond will be formed between a metal and a non-metal?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
• describe ionic bonding using Lewis electron dot symbols;
• list the favourable conditions for the formation of ionic bond;
• explain the formation of ionic bonding;
• give examples of ionic compounds;
• define Lattice energy;
• calculate lattice energy of ionic crystal from a given data using the Born-Haber
cycle;
• discuss the exceptions to octet rule;
• describe the properties of ionic bonding;
• carry an activity to demonstrate the effect of electricity on ionic compounds
(PbI2 and NaCl); and
• carry an activity to investigate the melting point and solubility of some ionic
compounds (NaCl and CuCl2).
You are familiar with how sodium metal reacts with chlorine gas, Cl2, to form sodium
chloride, NaCl, a substance composed of Na+ and Cl– ions.
2Na(s) + Cl2(g) → 2NaCl(s)
Let us look at the electronic configurations of sodium and chlorine atoms for a
possible interpretation of the reaction between them. A sodium atom, Na, by losing an
electron, forms a sodium ion, Na+, which has the same electron configuration as the
noble gas neon.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
116
Na → Na+ + e–
[Ne]3s1 [Ne]
A chlorine atom, Cl, by gaining an electron, forms a chloride ion, Cl–
, which has the
same electron configuration as the noble gas argon.
Cl + e– → Cl–
[Ne]3s2 3p5 [Ar]
Na + Cl → Na+ + Cl–
[Ne]3s1 [Ne]3s2 3p5 [Ne] [Ar]
When particles have opposite electric charges, a force of attraction exists between
them; known as electrostatic force of attraction. In sodium chloride, the sodium ions
and the chloride ions are held together by electrostatic force of attraction, thus forming
an ionic bond or electrovalent bond.
Exercise 3.1
1. Explain the formation of bonds in the following pairs of elements:
a potassium and chlorine,
b magnesium and oxygen and
c sodium and oxygen.
2. Which of the following elements will form a ionic bond with chlorine and why?
Calcium, Carbon, Oxygen and Silicon
3. Why ionic bond is also known as electrovalent bond?
4. How many types of chemical bonding you are familiar with?
5. State and explain the formation of ionic, covalent and metallic bonds. Use
diagrams wherever required.
6. List four important characteristics of ionic compounds.
7. What observable properties can you use to distinguish one kind of bond from
another?
Note! Ionic compounds are usually formed when metal cations bond with non-metal
anions. The only common exception is ammonium ion which is not a metal, but it
forms ionic compounds.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
117
3.2.1 Lewis Electron-Dot Symbols
In grade 9, you practiced how to write the Lewis formula for sodium and
chlorine. Do their electron configurations change when these atoms form
ions?
The American Chemist Gilbert N. Lewis (1875–1946) created a simple shorthand
system for depicting the electrons involved in bonding and the sequence of atoms in a
molecule. In a Lewis electron-dot symbol of an atom, the element symbol represents
the nucleus and inner electrons, (core electrons), and it is surrounded by a number of
dots equal to the number of valence electrons. You can write the Lewis symbol of any
main group element from its group number (IA to VIIIA), which gives the number of
valence electrons. These are placed one at a time on the four sides of the element
symbol and then paired up until all are used. For example, the Lewis electron-dot
symbol for phosphorus can be written as:
P or or P P or P
The Lewis electron-dot symbols for elements of period 2 may be written as:
Li Be B C N O F Ne
lA IIA IIIA IVA VA VIA VIIA VIIIA
Activity 3.5
Form a group and:
1. Use s p d f notation and Lewis symbols to represent the electron configuration of each
of the following:
a K+ b S2– c F– d Al3+
2. Explain how Lewis symbols and spdf notation differ in their representation of electron
spin.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Exercise 3.2
1. Use Lewis electron-dot symbols to depict the formation of sodium and
bromide ions from the atoms and determine the formula of the compound.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
118
2. Use Lewis electron-dot symbols to show the transfer of electrons from
magnesium atoms to nitrogen atoms to form ions with noble gas electron
configurations. What is the formula and name of the product?
3. Use Lewis electron-dot symbol to show the transfer of electron from aluminium
to oxygen atoms to form ions with noble gas electron configurations. What is the
formula and name of the product?
3.2.2 Formation of Ionic Bonding
The formation of ionic compounds is not merely the result of low ionization energies and
high affinities for electrons, although these factors are very important. It is always an
exothermic process; the compound is formed because it is more stable (lower in energy)
than its elements. Much of the stability of ionic compounds result from the packing of the
oppositely charged positive and negative ions together. A measure of just how much
stabilization results from this packing is given by the lattice energy (U). This quantity is
the energy change occurring when gaseous ions come together to form one mole of a
solid ionic compound, or the enthalpy change required for one mole of the solid ionic
substance to be separated completely into ions far removed from one another.
The lattice energy is an important indication of the strength of ionic interactions and is
a major factor influencing melting points, hardness, and solubility of ionic compounds.
The lattice energy plays a crucial role in ionic compound formation, but it is difficult to
measure it directly. Nevertheless, the lattice energies of many compounds have been
determined using Hess's law of heat summation, which states that an overall reaction's
enthalpy change is the sum of the enthalpy changes for the individual reactions that
make it up:
∆Htotal = ∆H1 + ∆H2 + ∆H3 +...
Lattice energies can be calculated through a Born-Haber cycle, in which a series of
steps from elements to ionic compounds for which all the change in enthalpies are
known except the lattice energy. This general approach to describing the energetics of
ionic compound formation is applied to sodium fluoride in the steps outlined below
and illustrated in Figure 3.3.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
119
Figure 3.3 The Born-Haber cycle for NaF(s).
Consider the Born-Haber cycle for the formation of sodium fluoride. We choose steps
that we can measure to depict the energy components of ionic compound formation,
from which we calculate the lattice energy. We begin with the elements in their
standard states, metallic sodium and gaseous diatomic fluorine. There are two routes
to follow: either the direct combination reaction (Route A) or the multi-step cycle
(Route B), one step of which is the unknown lattice energy. From Hess's law, it is
known that both routes involve the same overall enthalpy change.
The formation of NaF(s) from its elements is shown as happening either in one overall
reaction (Route A) or in five steps, each with its own enthalpy change (Route B). The
overall enthalpy change for the process (∆f H°) is calculated as the sum of the
enthalpy changes ∆H°step1, through ∆H°step4. Therefore, ∆H°step5, the lattice energy
(UNaF), can be calculated.
∆f
H° of NaF(s) (Route A) = sum of ∆H° for steps in cycle (Route B)
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
120
To preview Route B, the elements are converted to individual gaseous atoms (Step 1
and Step 2), the electron transfer steps form gaseous ions (Step 3 and Step 4), and
the ions form a solid (Step 5). We identify each ∆H° by its step number:
Step 1: Converting solid sodium to separate gaseous sodium atoms involves
breaking the metallic bonds that hold atoms in the sample, so it requires
energy:
Na(s) → Na(g) ∆H°step1 = + 108 kJ
(This process is called atomization, and the enthalpy change is ∆atH°.)
Step 2: Converting fluorine molecule to fluorine atoms involves breaking the covalent
bond in F2, so it requires energy. One mole of F atoms are needed to form
one mole of NaF, so start with ½ mol F2:
1
2 F2(g) → F(g) ∆H°step2 = 
1
2 bond energy (BE) of F2
= 
1
2 (154 kJ) = 77.0 kJ
Step 3: Removing the 3s electron from Na to form Na+ requires energy:
Na(g) → Na+(g) + e– ∆H°step3 = IE1 = + 495 kJ mol–1
Step 4: Adding an electron to F to form F– releases energy:
F(g) + e– → F–(g) ∆H°step4 = EA = –328 kJ
Step 5: Forming the crystalline ionic solid from the gaseous ions is the step whose
enthalpy changes (the lattice energy) is unknown:
Na+(g) + F–(g) → NaF(s) ∆H°step5 = UNaF (lattice energy) = ?
We know the enthalpy change of the formation reaction (Route A),
Na(g) + 
1
2 F2(g) → NaF(s) ∆H°overall = ∆f
H° = –574 kJ
Therefore, we calculate the lattice energy using Hess's Law:
Solving for UNaF gives
UNaF = ∆f
H° – (∆H°step1 + ∆H°step2 ∆H°step3 + ∆H°step4)
= –574 kJ mol–1 – [108 kJ mol–1 + 77 kJ mol–1
+ 495 kJ mol–1 + (–328 kJ mol–1)]
= –926 kJ mol–1
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
121
Note that the magnitude of the lattice energy dominates the multistep process.
Exercise 3.3
1. Write the formulas and names of the compounds formed from the following
ionic interactions: (use periodic table)
a The 2+ ion and 1– ion are both isoelectronic with the atoms of a
chemically unreactive period 4 element.
b The 2+ ion and the 2– ion are both isoelectronic with the period 3 noble gas.
c The ions formed are the largest and smallest ionizable atoms in period 2.
2. In each of the following ionic compounds identify the main group to which X
belongs:
a XF2 c X2O3
b MgX d Na2X
3. For lithium, the enthalpy of sublimation is +161 kJ mol–1, and the first
ionization energy is +520 kJ mol–1. The dissociation energy of fluorine is +154
kJ mol–1, and the electron affinity of fluorine is –328 kJ mol–1. The lattice
energy of LiF is –1047 kJ mol–1. Calculate the overall enthalpy change for the
reaction?
Li(s) + ½F2(g) → LiF(s) ∆H° = ?
4. The enthalpy of formation of caesium chloride is
Cs(s) + ½Cl2(g) → CsCl(s) ∆H° = – 44.28 kJ mol–1
The enthalpy of sublimation of caesium is
Cs(s) → Cs(g) ∆H° = + 77.6 kJ mol–1
Use these data, with other data from other sources, to calculate the lattice
energy of CsCl(s)
5. Using the following data:
Enthalpy of sublimation of Ca = +178.2 kJ mol–1
Enthalpy of dissociation of Cl2 = +243.4 kJ mol–1
Enthalpy of formation of CaCl2 = –795.8 kJ mol–1
First and second Ionization energies for Ca are +590 kJ mol–1 and
+1145 kJ mol–1 respectively.
The electron affinity of Cl = –348.7 kJ mol–1
Determine the lattice energy of CaCl2
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
122
Factors Affecting Formation of Ionic Bonding
Activity 3.6
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
1. In general, how does the lattice energy of an ionic compound depend on the charges
and sizes of the ions?
2. For each pair, choose the compound with the higher lattice energy, and explain your
choice.
a LiCl or CsCl b NaF or MgO c BaS or CsCl
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
The formation of ionic bonding is influenced by various factors. Some of the major
factors are presented below.
Ionization energy (IE): Elements having low IE have a more favourable chance to form
a cation, thereby having a greater tendency to form ionic bonds. Thus, low ionization
energy of metallic elements favours the formation of an ionic bond. That is why alkali
and alkaline earth metals form ionic compounds.
Electron affinity (EA): The other atom participating in the formation of an ionic
compound must form an anion by gaining electron(s) and losing energy. Higher
electron affinity favours the formation of an anion. Generally, the elements having
higher electron affinity favour the formation of an ionic bond. Halogens have high
electron affinities, and therefore halogens generally form ionic compounds when they
react with metals.
Lattice energy: When a cation and an anion come closer, they get attracted to each
other due to the electrostatic (coulombic) force of attraction. The electrostatic force of
attraction between oppositely-charged ions release a certain amount of energy and an
ionic bond is formed. If the coulombic attraction forces are stronger, then more energy
gets released and a more stable or a stronger ionic bond is formed. Larger lattice
energy would favour the formation of an ionic bond. Lattice energy thus is a measure
of coulombic attractive force between the combining ions. The lattice energy (U) of
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
123
an ionic compound depends directly on the product of the ionic charges (q1 × q2),
and inversely on the distance (r) between them.
U∝ q q 1 2 ×
r
where q1 and q2 are the charges on +ve and –ve ions respectively, and r is the
distance between the charges q1 and q2
. Thus, small ions having higher ionic charge
shall have larger lattice energy. If the total energy released is more than that which is
absorbed, then the formation of ionic compound is favoured.
3.2.3 Exceptions to Octet Rule in Ionic Compounds
Activity 3.7
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. The principal exceptions to the octet rule are found in ionic compounds in which the
cations do not acquire noble gas electron configuration. Identify the cations that obey
or violet the octet rule.
a FeCl3 b CuO c NaCl d LiF
2. Draw Lewis structure for CH4, BF3 and SF6.
How many electrons are present around the central atoms, C , B and S, respectively?
What is the difference between the central atoms in terms of number of electrons?
Are these in conformity with the Octet rule?
Can you name some more examples similar to these?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
As you have studied in grade 9, the octet rule works well for the representative
metals (Group IA, IIA) and the nonmetals, but not for the transition elements and
post-transiton elements. This is because they have d and f subshell orbitals.
There are certain exceptions to octet rule. We will discuss it here in context with the
ionic compounds.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
124
Less than Octet (Central Atom is Deficient of Electrons):
Ions of some elements which are near to helium in the periodic table do not obey the
octet rule. The tendency of these atoms (H, Li, Be and B) is to attain an arrangement
of two electrons like the noble gas He (duplet configuration), which is also a stable
configuration. Hydride ion (H–
), lithium ion (Li+), beryllium ion (Be2+) and boron ion
(B3+) are isoelectronic with He. Therefore, compounds like LiH, BeCl2 and BF3 are
stable in spite of short of electrons around the central atom than the octet. In these
cases the number of electrons around Li, Be and B is 2, 4 and 6 respectively.
Although atoms with less than an octet may be stable, they will usually attempt to
form a fourth bond to get eight electrons. BF3 is stable, but it will form BF4 when
possible.
More than Octet (18-Electron Rule):
The ions of some transition elements and post-transition elements do not usually obey
the octet rule. For transition metals, the 18-electron rule replaces the octet rule, due
to the involvement of d orbitals of these atoms. The atoms of these elements would
have to lose a large number of electrons to achieve the noble-gas configurations. This
will require enormous amount of ionization energy, which cannot be available easily.
Nevertheless, these elements also form positive ions. But these ions do not have the
usual noble gas valance shell electron configurations of ns2np6 and are not
isoelectronic with any of the noble gases. It is important to note that when these
atoms form positive ions, electrons are always lost first from the shells with the highest
value of the principal quantum number (n).
Consider the electron configurations of the ions of the transition elements iron and zinc
and the post-transition elements gallium and tin.
Electron Configurations of Iron:
26Fe : 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p6 4s2 3d6
26Fe2+ : 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p6 3d6
26Fe3+ : 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p6 3d5
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
125
A stable ion of iron with valence shell electron configuration is 3s2 3p6 3d5
 which is
not isoelectronic with a noble gas. Fe2+ is a well-known stable ion with a valence shell
electron configuration 3s2
 3p6 3d6 which is not isoelectronic with any of the noble
gases.
Electron configurations of zinc:
Also,
30Zn2+ : 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p6 3d10
is not isoelectronic with any of the noble gases.
Electron configurations of gallium:
The post-transition element gallium (Ga) loses electrons first from the 4p orbital and
then from the 4s orbital to from a Ga3+ ion as
[ ]
31
3+
31
2 2 6 2 6 2 10 1
2 2 6 2 6 10 10
Ga : 
Ga : = Ar 
122 33 43 4
122 33 3 3 
ss ps psd p
s s ps pd d
On closely examining the electron configurations of Zn2+ and Ga3+, we will realize that
ions have completely-filled outer subshells and a noble gas core. Their valance
electron configuration can be generally represented as ns2np6nd10.
Electron configurations of tin:
The heavier post-transition elements like Pb and Sn lose the p electrons or both the p
and s electrons from the valence shell.
50Sn: [Kr]5s24d105p2
50Sn2+: [Kr]5s24d10
50Sn4+: [Kr]4d10
Generally, these properties are exhibited by ions of elements from
i) Group IB and Group IIB (transition elements) and
ii) Group IIIA and Group IVA (heavier post-transition elements)
Neither of these configurations are noble gas configurations.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
126
3.2.4 Properties of Ionic Compounds
Investigation of Solubility of Ionic Compounds
Objective: To investigate the solubility of NaCl and CuCl2
Apparatus and Chemicals: Test tube, water bath, Bunsen burner, NaCl, CuCl2,
ethanol, hexane and benzene
Procedure:
1. Place about 0.5 g each of NaCl and CuCl2
 in three separate test tubes and add
about 2.5 mL of water and shake well.
2. If some residue is there in the test tube/s, heat it on Bunsen burner.
3. Repeat step 1 afresh using ethanol, hexane and benzene.
(If the salt is soluble at room temperature, do not heat it.)
Observations and analysis:
Prepare an observation table in your notebook for the solubility of NaCl and
CuCl2 in all the three solvents at room temperature and on heating (wherever
required) and record the observations.
Solvent NaCl CuCl2
Water
Ethanol
Hexane
Benzene
Inference/Conclusion
Interpret the observation table and give results.
Make a generalised statement about the solubility of ionic compounds in polar and
non-polar solvents.
 Experiment 3.1
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
127
 Experiment 3.2
Electrical Conductivity of Ionic Compounds
Objective: To test the electrical conductivity of molten compounds
Apparatus and chemicals: 9-volt battery, 6-watt bulb with a bulb holder,
conducting wires, two carbon rods, lead (II) iodide or lead (II) bromide.
Procedure A:
1. Connect the circuit as shown in Figure 3.3 in which a 9 volt DC is
connected via a bulb.
2. Using about 2 cm depth of PbI2 in a small beaker, test the conductivity of
the lead iodide crystals. Do not throw away the PbI2 and be careful not to
contaminate the sample because you will reuse it later. (Note: it could be
 Experiment 3.3
Thermal behaviour of ionic compounds
Objective: To study the effect of heat on ionic compounds.
Apparatus and chemicals: Test tubes, test tubes holders, sodium chloride, and
copper (II) chloride.
Procedure:
1. Take two hard glass test tubes and label them as A and B.
2. Add 0.5 g each of dry sodium chloride crystals and copper (II) chloride in
test tubes A and B respectively.
3. Hold these test tubes with the help of test tube holders.
4. Heat the tubes simultaneously on the Bunsen burner flame first slowly and
then strongly while shaking intermittently.
Caution: Take care not to inhale any fumes/vapours formed during heating.
Observations and analysis:
1. Do the crystals melt?
2. Do they have high or low melting points?
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
128
argued that a fairer test of the solid compound would be to use a lump of
the compound rather than its powder).
3. Test the conductivity of large crystals of copper (II) sulphate and sodium
chloride if any of them are available in your laboratory.
Procedure B:
1. Now heat the same lead (II) iodide or Lead (II) bromide (used in the above
experiment) in a beaker on a tripod and wire gauze or in a boiling tube
supported by a clamp and stand until it melts;
2. Test the conductivity of the molten compound by dipping the carbon
electrodes (carbon rods) into the molten compound as shown in the figure
below:
e–
e–
Lead (II) iodide
solution in water
Anode Cathode
9 V DC supply
Figure 3.4 Conductivity of electrolytes.
Observations and analysis:
1. What did you observe?
2. Which of the compounds (molten or solid) conduct electricity? Why?
3. All compounds contain at least two elements. Examine the names of those
compounds which conduct electricity when in molten state and decide to
which classes of elements the components of these compounds belong.
Name the type of bonding that exists in the compounds used.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
129
 Experiment 3.4
Electrical Conductivity of Ionic compounds
Objective: To test the electrical conductivity of the aqueous solutions of some
common ionic compounds.
Apparatus and chemicals: 9-volt battery, 6-watt bulb with a bulb holder,
conducting wires, two carbon rods, H2O, lead (II) iodide, NaCl.
Procedure:
1. Dissolve the compound in 50 mL of water in two seperate beakers.
2. Connect the same circuit you used above and test the conductivity of each
aqueous solution.
Observations and analysis:
a Predict what happens at the electrodes based on the type of the compound
used for the experiment.
b Do you expect the same product(s) at the respective electrodes when
electricity passes through molten and aqueous solutions of the compounds?
e–
e–
Lead (II) iodide
solution in water
Anode Cathode
9 V DC supply
Figure 3.5 Electrochemical cell showing the conductivity of an aqueous solution.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
130
Let us Summarise
Ionic compounds are crystalline solids at room temperature. The fundamental units of
ionic solid are positive and negative ions. Crystalline ionic solids are usually brittle and
non-conductors of electricity, although molten crystals may be good conductors. They
usually have high melting and boiling points.
Ionic compounds are nonvolatile.
Ionic compounds are usually soluble in inorganic solvents (water is the most common
solvent for ionic compounds) but insoluble in organic solvents like benzene, ethanol
and carbon tetrachloride.
Note! Ionic compounds are very resistant to heat but many will be easily broken by
water.
3.3 COVALENT BONDING AND MOLECULAR GEOMETRY
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• define covalent bonding;
• explain the formation of covalent bonding;
• give examples of covalent molecules;
• draw Lewis structures or electron dot formulas of some covalent molecules;
• illustrate the formation of coordinate covalent bonding using examples;
• define resonance structures;
• draw resonance structures of some covalent molecules and polyatomic ions;
• discuss the exceptions to the octet rule in covalent bonding;
• distinguish between polar and non polar covalent molecules;
• describe the properties of covalent molecules;
• carryout an activity to investigate the effects of heat, electricity and some solvents
on covalent compounds (naphthalene, graphite, iodine and ethanol);
• describe the valence shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPR);
• distinguish between the bonding pairs and non bonding pairs of electrons;
• describe how electron pair arrangements and shapes of molecules can be
predicted from the number of electron pairs;
• explain why double bonds and lone pairs cause deviations from ideal bond
angles;
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
131
Activity 3.8
• explain the term dipole moment with the help of a diagram;
• describe the relationship between dipole moment and molecular geometry;
• describe how bond polarities and molecular shapes combine to give molecular
polarity;
• predict the geometrical shapes of some simple molecules;
• construct models to represent shapes of some simple molecules;
• define intermolecular forces;
• name the different types of intermolecular forces;
• explain dipole dipole interactions;
• give examples of dipole dipole interaction;
• define hydrogen bonding;
• explain the effect of hydrogen bond on the properties of substances;
• give reason why H bonding is stronger than ordinary dipole dipole interaction;
• explain dispersion (London) forces;
• give examples of dispersion forces; and
• predict the strength of intermolecular forces for a given pair of molecules;
Formation of Covalent Bonding
Form a group and attempt the following as per the instructions:
1. Give one main difference between ionic and covalent bond.
2. What happens to the valence electrons when a covalent bond is formed between two
atoms?
3. Explain the formation of polar covalent and coordinate covalent bond.
4. Draw Lewis dot structures for AlCl4
–
 and BH4
–
.
5. Arrange single, double and triple bonds in ascending order of their bond strength and
bond lengths. Justify your answer.
6. Describe the interactions that occur between individual chlorine atoms as they
approach each other to form chlorine molecules (Cl2
). What combination of forces
gives rise to the energy holding the atoms together and to the final internuclear
distance.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
132
When elements from group IA (period 2 onwards), VIA or VIIA combine
together, an ionic bond is formed. What will happen if two atoms of the same
element or the elements from any of these groups combine together?
Cosider the formation of hydrogen molecule (H2). When two hydrogen atoms are far
apart, each behaves as though the other were not present. As they approach each
other and the distance between the two nuclei decreases, each nucleus starts to attract
the other atom's electron, which lowers the potential energy of the system. Attractions
continue to draw the atoms closer, and the system becomes progressively lower in
energy. As attractions increase, repulsions between the nuclei and the electrons will
also increase. At some internuclear distance, maximum attraction is achieved in the
face of the increasing repulsion, as the system has its minimum energy. Any shorter
distance would increase repulsions and cause a rise in potential energy (see
Figure 3.1). Thus, a covalent bond, such as the one that holds the hydrogen atoms
together, arises from the balance between nucleus-electron attractions and electronelectron and nucleus-nucleus repulsions. Therefore, a covalent bond is formed when a
pair of electrons is shared between two atoms. Some examples of covalent molecules
are HCl, H2S, C2H4, N2, CCl4, BCl3, H2O, NH3, SO2, PCl5, O3, etc. Generally,
substances that contain covalent bonds are called molecules.
Note: Ionization energy of hydrogen (IE1 = 1312 kJ mol–1) is very high making it
difficult to lose electron.
Representation of Covalent Bond (Drawing Lewis Structures)
The representation of covalent bonding through Lewis symbols and shared electronpairs is called a Lewis structure. Lewis structure for hydrogen molecule formed from
hydrogen atoms is
If we ‘‘double count’’ the shared electrons each H atom appear to have two electrons
in its valence shell analogous to the electron configuration of helium.
Similarly, consider fluorine, which also exists in the diatomic form, F2. Fluorine atoms
are also joined by a covalent bond.
Each fluorine atom in the fluorine molecule has eight valence electrons, an arrangement
lsimilar to that of the noble gas argon. The fluorine atoms obey the octet rule. The
shared pairs of electrons in a molecule are called bonding pairs. The other electron pairs
that stay with on atom and are not shared are called non-bonding pairs or lone pairs.
We can write the Lewis formula for a convalent compound of known geometry by
using the following rules.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
133
1. Determine the total number of valence electrons. It is this number of electrons
that must appear in the final Lewis structure. The total number of electrons for
a molecule is the sum of the valence electrons for each atom. For a
polyatomic anion, which has one or more extra electrons, add one electron for
each unit of negative charge. For a polyatomic cation, which is missing one or
more electrons, subtract one electron for each unit of positive charge.
 Exercise 3.4
Determine the total number of valence electrons for the following species:
a CO2 c NH+
4
b SO2–
4 d N2O4
2. Write the skeletal structure. The most electropositive atom usually occupies
the central position. Connect bonded atoms with an electron-pair bond
(a dash). Hydrogen is an exception; it is always a terminal atom, even when
bonded to a more electronegative atom.
3. Place electron pairs around terminal atoms so that each (except hydrogen) has
an octet.
4. Assign any remaining electrons as lone-pairs around the central atom.
5. If at this stage, a central atom has fewer than eight electrons, a multiple
bond(s) is likely. Move one or more lone-pair of electrons from a terminal
atom(s) to a region between it and the central atom to form a double or a
triple bond.
Exercise 3.5
1. Write a plausible Lewis structure of:
a nitrogen trichloride, NCl3 b chlorate ion, ClO3
-
c phosphonium ion, PH4
+ d phosgene, COCl2
2. Draw a Lewis structure for CO3
2–, SF4
 and HCOOH (formic acid).
3. Which of the following atoms cannot serve as a central atom in a Lewis
structure O, He, F, H, P? Explain.
4. Write a plausible Lewis structure for carbonyl sulphide, COS.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
134
Coordinate-Covalent Bonding
What is a coordinate covalent bond?
Activity 3.9
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. Why (a) the ammonia molecule, (b) the oxygen atom can participate readily in
coordinate covalent bonding.
2. Use Lewis structures to show the formation of coordinate covalent linkage between
(a) phosphorus trichloride and oxygen (b) boron trifluoride and ammonia.
3. In the following structure of ammonium ion, can you identify the coordinate covalent
bond?
+ H
|
|
H
H—N —H
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Covalent bonds are formed through the contribution of one electron each by atoms
involved in an electron-pair bond. There is another possibility in which one atom can
“donate” two of its electrons to provide the shared pair between itself and an
“acceptor” atom. When one atom provides both the electrons for a shared pair, the
bond is called a coordinate-covalent bond.
Some examples of molecules which contain coordinate-covalent bond include O3,
NH3BF3 and POCl3.
Resonance Structures
Discuss the concept of resonance. What is the difference between a resonance
structure and a resonance hybrid?
For some molecules, there is no best choice between a number of equally acceptable
Lewis structures. Consider the simple example of ozone, O3, in which the
arrangement of nuclei is O–O–O. This molecule has 6 × 3 = 18 valence electrons,
and it is possible to draw two possible structures for O3:
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
135
O O — — O
123
— O— O —O
123
—
( )I ( ) II
Both the structures satisfy octet rule. The two structures for O3 suggest that the bond
between O1 and O2 differs from that between O2 and O3 one single bond and one
double bond. Therefore, in each of the two structures one bond should be a single
bond while the other a double bond. If it is so then one bond (double bond) should
be shorter than the other bond (single bond). But experimental evidences show that
both the bonds are exactly equivalent having same bond lengths and bond strengths.
O 1.278Å
1.278Å
O O
Since both the bonds are identical which one is a double bond?
O
O O
 or 
O
O O
The Lewis structure is equivalent except for the placement of the electrons (i.e., the
location of the double bond). In such a situation, the correct way to describe ozone
molecule as Lewis structures would be:
O
O O
Resonance Structures
O
O O O
O
O
Resonance Hybrid
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
136
This indicates that the ozone molecule is described by an average of two Lewis
structures (i.e. the resonance forms). The bond-lengths between the oxygens are
intermediate between characteristic single and double bond-lengths between a pair of
oxygen.
This description of O3 is called resonance, a circumstance in which two or more
possible Lewis structures can be written and the true structure is a composite or
hybrid of them. The different structures used to represent the molecule or ion are
called contributing structures or resonance structures, and we write them linked by
double-headed arrows. The actual species that exists is called a resonance hybrid.
The resonance structures differ only in the distribution of electrons.
Known misconceptions about the structure of ozone:
• The bond lengths between the central oxygen and the other two oxygen atoms
are identical.
• It may be expected that if one bond is a double bond, then it should be
shorter than the other (single) bond.
In molecules such as CH4, H2S, NF3, PF5, SF6 etc in which resonance is not
involved, bonding electron pairs can be described as existing in fairly well-defined
regions between the two atoms. These electrons are localized. In O3, to produce Oto-O bonds that are intermediate between single and double bonds, we need to think
of some of the electrons in the resonance hybrid as being delocalized. Delocalized
electrons are bonding electrons that are spread over several atoms.
Activity 3.10
Form a group and discuss the concept of resonance. When is this concept applied to
depict adequately the bonding in a molecule; explain using suitable examples.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
137
Example 3.1
Write three equivalent Lewis structures for the nitrate ion, NO3
–
. Describe its
resonance hybrid structure.
Solution:
a There are 5 + (3 × 6) + 1 = 24 electrons
b The skeletal structures is:
|
O
O—N—O
c Place three lone pairs of electrons on each O atom.
–
|
O
O—N—O
d All 24 electrons have been assigned.
e The central N atom has only six valence electrons as shown. Move a lone
pair of electrons from one of the terminal oxygen atom to from a double bond
to the central N atom. Because the double bond can go to any one of the
three O atoms, we get three structures that differ only in the position of the
double bond.
–
|
O
O—N—O
–
|
O
O—N—O
–
|
O
O—N—O
The resonance hybrid, which involves equal contributions from these three
equivalent resonance structures, has N-to-O bonds with bond length and
bond energies intermediate between single and double bonds.
Exercise 3.6
1. Write three equivalent structures for the SO3 molecule that obey the octet rule.
2. Draw Lewis structures of all the important resonance forms of each of the
following:
a NO2F(N central) b HNO3 c NO–
2
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
138
Exceptions to the Octet rule in Covalent Bonding
Activity 3.11
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
1. In which pattern(s) does X obey the octet rule?
a X b X c X d X
e X f X
2–
2. What requirements are needed for an atom to expand its valence shell? Which of the
following atoms can expand its valance shell; F, S, H, Al?
3. Identify the atoms in PCl3
, PCl5
, OF2
, BF3
, and SiF4
 which do not obey octet rule.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
It has been noticed that there are three groups of molecules that are exceptions to the
octet rule.
Less than octet (central atom is deficient of electrons):
Molecules whose central atoms have fewer than eight electrons (Below octet). This
group consists of molecules containing central atoms from Group IIA and IIIA.
BeCl2, BF3 and AlCl3, whose Lewis formula are shown below, are typical examples:
Cl — Be — Cl
4 electrons around Be
|
F
F—B—F
6 electrons around B
|
Cl
Cl — Al — Cl
6 electrons aroud Al
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
139
More than octet (central atom has excess of electrons):
Molecules whose central atoms have more than eight electrons (Expanded octet). This
group consists of molecules containing central atoms from periods 3, 4, 5, and 6.
PF5, SF6 and XeF4 are typical examples of this type;
10 electrons around P 12 electrons around S 12 electrons aroud Xe
F—P
|
F
F
F
| |
Xe
|
F
F
|
F |
|
|
F
F
S
|
F
F
| |
|
|
|
F
F
F
F
Molecules containing an odd number of electrons:
Even if stable molecules of this kind are rare, they do exist. Some examples are ClO2,
NO and NO2 having 19, 11 and 17 valence electrons respectively. The best way to
suggest the Lewis-like structure for these molecules is:
O—Cl — O
ClO2
Exercise 3.7
1. Suggest the Lewis-like structure for NO and NO2 molecules.
2. The following species do not obey the octet rule. Draw a Lewis structure for
each one and state the type of octet rule exception:
a BH3 b AsF–
4 c SeCl4 d PF–
6
e ClO3 f BrF3 g BeF2 h XeF2
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
140
Polar and Non-Polar Covalent Molecules
From a group and collect the following substances. Divide them in two groups. Group A
consists of:
a Naphthalene
b Sodium chloride
c Iodine
d Wax
and group B consists of the following solvents
i Carbon tetrachloride
ii Water
iii Methylbenzene
Each solid in group A dissolves best in at least one solvent in group B. Point out the solid
and the solvent it dissolves in and give reasons for your choice.
When bonding electron-pairs in a covalent bond are shared equally, the result is a
nonpolar covalent bond. When the atoms are alike in a covalent bond, the two atoms
with equal electronegativities will exhibit equal sharing of an electron pair, and the
electrons are not drawn closer to one atom than to the other. The H–H and
Cl–Cl bonds are nonpolar. In a covalent bond between atoms of different
electronegativities, there is an unequal sharing of an electron pair and the electrons
spend more of their time around the more electronegative atom. Such a bond is said
to be polar covalent bond. The H–Cl bond is a polar bond. This is because chlorine
is more electronegative than the hydrogen atom and represented as
Hδ + – Clδ–
to indicate the polar nature of a bond. In the representation the δ+ and δ– (read
“delta plus” and “delta minus”) signify that one end (H) is partially positive and the
other end (Cl) is partially negative. The term partial charge signifies something less
than the full charges of the ions that would result from complete electron transfer.
For a diatomic molecule having a polar covalent bond, such as HCl, we can describe
a quantity called the dipole moment, which is a vector sum of the bond moments in a
Activity 3.12
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
141
molecule. Bond moment is a measure of polarity of a diatomic covalent bond. The
dipole moment (µ) is defined as the product of the magnitude of the charge (δ) at
either end of the dipole multiplied by the distance (d) that separates the charge.
µ = δ × d
The SI-unit of dipole moment is coulomb-metre (C.m). Dipole moments are often
expressed in the non-SI unit debye (D), where 1D = 3.33564 × 10–30 Cm.
Note! For a diatomic molecule, the bond moment is the dipole moment. The dipole
moment of a polyatomic molecule (three or more atoms) depends on the geometry of
the molecule. If the bond moments are equal in magnitude but opposite in direction,
then they will cancel each other and the resultant dipole moment will be zero,
provided that the vector sum of the bond moments is zero.
Exercise 3.8
Both CO2 and BCl3 have zero dipole moments, but the C = O and B – Cl bond
moments are not zero. Explain.
Properties of Covalent Compounds
Tetrachloromethane (carbon tetrachloride) is a covalent compound. Would
you expect it to be a conductor of electricity?
 Experiment 3.5
Investigating the effect of heat on covalent compounds
Objective: To determine the melting points of naphthalene.
Apparatus and chemicals: Thermometer, stirrer, beaker, melting point tube,
naphthalene, glycerine, Bunsen burner.
Procedure:
Set up the apparatus shown in Figure 3.6. Place a small amount of naphthalene in
melting point tube. Attach the tube to the side of the thermometer (the liquid in the
beaker will hold the tube in position). Heat the beaker slowly. When the
naphthalene melts, record the reading on the thermometer. Determine the melting
point of iodine and graphite similarly.
142 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
142
 Experiment 3.6
Thermometer
Rubber cork
Beaker
Bunsen
burner
Glycerine
Stand
Stirrer
Melting point tube
Naphthalene
Figure 3.6 Determination of melting point of naphthalene.
Observations and analysis:
Check your result by referring to standard melting point values. Discuss on
possible reasons for the differences in melting point compared to the standard
melting point.
The effects of heat, electricity and some solvents on covalent
compounds
Objective: To test the effects of heat, electricity and some solvents on covalent
compounds.
Apparatus and chemicals: Beakers, stirrer, test tubes, water, alchohol,
naphthalene, iodine crystals, and graphite.
Procedure:
You are provided with four substances, namely naphthalene, graphite, iodine and
ethanol. Investigate the effect of heat and electricity on these substances as well as
their solubility in water and other non-polar (organic) solvent.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
143
Observations and analysis:
Record your observations in the following table by drawing on your note book.
Substance → Naphthalene Graphite Iodine Ethanol
Property
↓
Effect of Heat
Effect of Electricity
Solubility in water
Solubility in non-polar
solvent
Results and Discussion:
1. Draw your conclusion from the above observations.
2. Do these substances conduct electricity either in the solid state or in the
molten (liquid) state?
3. Is there any chemical reaction that takes place at the electrodes?
Activity 3.13
Form a group and discuss the following question:
Why does ammonia, NH3, dissolve in water but methane, CH4 does not?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Unlike any ionic compound, many of the covalent compounds are found in gaseous
state at room temperature. Consider methane (CH4), the simplest compound between
carbon and hydrogen, which have comparable, intermediate electronegativities. It is a
gas at room temperature. Cooling methane to a low temperature condenses it first to
a liquid and then to a solid. Unlike melted ionic compounds, liquid covalent
compounds do not conduct electricity. Therefore, liquid methane does not conduct
electricity. Covalent compounds are molecular substances. They have low melting and
boiling points. Most covalent compounds are soluble in non-polar solvents. Generally,
• Covalent compounds exist as separate molecules because electrically neutral atoms
form them and the forces of attraction between these molecules are relatively weak.
• Due to weak intermolecular forces, many covalent molecules or covalent
compounds are liquids or gases at room temperature. However, some covalent
molecules like iodine are solids at room temperature.
Liquid — H2O, Br2,
Gas — CO2, H2, Cl2, NH3.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
144
• Covalent compounds are volatile.
• Generally they have low melting points and boiling points.
• Covalent compounds are generally insoluble in water. Most covalent compounds
are soluble in nonpolar solvents.
• Nonpolar covalent compounds are non-electrolytes because they do not conduct
electricity.
3.3.1 Molecular Geometry
Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory
A molecule is an independent, minute architecture extending in three dimensions
throughout its tiny volume of space. Let us discuss the shapes of molecules and their
effect on the properties of a molecule. We start by describing the Valence Shell
Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) model, which allows us to convert two-dimensional
Lewis structure into three-dimensional (3D) geometry.
The basic principle of VSEPR theory is that the pair of valence shell electrons around
the central atom stays as far apart from each other as possible to minimize repulsion
among them. For simplicity, a set of electrons is defined as any number of electronpairs that occupies a localized region around a central atom. This set may consists of
a single bond (–), a double bond (=), a triple bond (≡), lone-pair(s) or in some cases
even a lone (single) electron. Each of these is a separate set of electrons that repels
the other groups and occupies as much space as possible around the central atom -
one set of electrons repels the other sets to maximize the angles between them. The
three-dimensional arrangement of these sets gives rise to the shape of the molecule.
Electron Pair Arrangement and Molecular Shape
The electron pair arrangement is defined by the sets of electrons, both bonding and
nonbonding (lone-pair), around the central atom. On the other hand the molecular
shape is defined by the relative positions of the atomic nuclei. Molecular shapes that
occur when all the surrounding electron sets are bonding sets differ from molecular
shapes when some of the electron sets are non-bonding sets. Thus, the same electron
set arrangement can give rise to different molecular shapes. To classify molecular
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
145
shapes, the AXmEn designation is assigned, where A is the central atom, X is the
terminal atom, E is lone-pair (nonbonding) electron sets, m and n are positive
integers.
The arrangements that best minimize repulsions naturally depend on the number of
electron sets. Repulsive forces among valence pairs diminish in the following order:
Lone pair vs lone pair > lone pair vs bonding pair > bonding pair vs bonding pair.
In this section, you will see electrons set ranging from two to six around the central
atom. Two electron sets locate themselves on opposite sides of the atom in a linear
arrangement, three sets form a trigonal planar structure, four sets arrange themselves
at the corners of a tetrahedron, five sets define a trigonal bipyramid, and six sets form
an octahedron.
In the case of multiple (double or triple) bonds the counting is not different, because
you are already informed that a double bond is considered as one set and a triple
bond as another set of electrons. For example, in the case of CO2, O=C=O, there
are two sets of electrons around the central atom, acetylene, C2H2, H–C≡C–H, two
sets of electrons around each of the central atoms.
Guidelines for Applying VSEPR Model
The VSEPR model is an approach of using the number of electrons surrounding a
central atom to study the molecular structures, based on the theory that the structure
around a given atom is determined principally by minimizing electron-pair repulsion.
Here are some guidelines for applying the VSEPR model:
1. First, write the Lewis structure of the molecule, in this model, consider only
the electron sets (pairs) of the central atom.
2. Count the total number of electron sets around the central atom, including
both the bonding pairs and lone pairs. Usually a lone pair, a single unpaired
electron and any bond: single, double or triple, each count as one area of
electron density. For species with more than one central atom, treat each
central atom separately.
3. Use the VSEPR geometry to predict the shape of the molecule.
4. In predicting bond angles, bear in mind that the repulsion of the lone pairs is
stronger than between those of the bonding pairs. VSEPR theory is best used
as a tool to explain why a given structure is distorted rather than as a
predictive tool.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
146
In explaining why the distortion occurs you need to balance three competing
influences:
• lone pairs take up more space than bonding pairs. Repulsions between
electrons in a lone-pair and the other electrons (in either bonds or other lone
pairs) may cause distortions in the structure.
• triple bonds are fatter than double bonds, which are fatter than single bonds.
The amount of electron-electron repulsion experienced between a bond and
lone pairs or other bonding pairs decreases in the order: triple > double >
single. Therefore, we expect that a triple bond may cause more distortions in
the structure than either a double or single bond and that a double bond will
cause more distortion when compared to a single bond.
• bonds which involve a significant difference in electronegativity between the
atoms in the bond will have the electrons in the bond distorted toward the
more electronegative atom. This will decrease electron density near the central
atom and lessen the repulsion between this bonding-pair and other electronpairs in the molecule.
Molecular Shape and Molecular Polarity
Activity 3.14
Form a group and discuss the following:
Water has a resultant dipole moment of 6.23×10–30 C m(1.87D). Explain why this fact
proves that the H2O molecule must have a bent shape.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Many aspects of molecule’s chemical behaviour can be understood if one knows the
geometry (shape) of a substance. Molecular shape affects many properties of the
molecule like molecular polarity, which in turn influence melting and boiling points,
solubility, and even reactivity. Molecular polarity is created by molecules with a net
imbalance of charge. In molecules with more than two atoms, both shape and bond
polarity determines the molecular polarity.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
147
Bond Polarity and Dipole Moment
Activity 3.15
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
There are three different dichloroethenes, C2
H2
Cl2
, which we can designate x, y and z.
Compound x has no dipole moment, but compound z does. Compound z and x each
combine with hydrogen to give the same product:
C2
H2
Cl2
 + H2 → ClCH2
 – ClCH2
 (x or z)
What are the structures of x, y and z ? Would you expect compound y to have a nonzero
dipole moment?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
Polar bonds do not necessarily lead to polar molecules. For example, the large
electronegativity difference between C and oxygen makes each C-O bond quite polar.
However, because carbon dioxide (CO2) is a AX2 type molecule with two sets of
electrons around the central atom, and its shape is linear, and its bonds are directed
180° from each other, so there is no net dipole moment (µ); µ = 0 D
Another molecule with identical atoms bonded to the central atom is water. Unlike
carbon dioxide, water has a significant dipole moment (µ = 1.87 D). Both water and
carbon dioxide are triatomic molecules and you may expect them to exhibit similar
shape and polarity. Due to the effect of the lone pairs of electrons on its shape, water
is a polar molecule. In each O–H bond, electron density is pulled toward the more
electronegative O atom, but the bond polarities do not counterbalance each other,
because the water molecule is V-shaped. Instead, the bond polarities partially
reinforce each other, and the oxygen end of the molecule is considerably more
negative than the other end.
Carbon dioxide and water demonstrate how molecular shape influences polarity.
When two or more different molecules have the same shape, the nature of the atoms
surrounding the central atom can have a major effect on the polarity of a molecule.
Consider tetrachloromethane (CCl4) and trichloromethane (CHCl3), two AX4 type
molecules - tetrahedral shape with different polarities. In CCl4
, the surrounding atoms
are all Cl atoms. Although each C–Cl bond is polar, the molecule is nonpolar because
the individual bond polarities counterbalance each other. In CHCl3, an H atom
substitutes for one of the Cl atoms, disturbing the balance and giving chloroform a
significant dipole moment.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
148
Cl — C — Cl
Cl
|
|
Cl
 =0D
Cl — C — Cl
H
|
|
Cl
 = 1.02 D
If you consider the two constitutional isomers of dichloroethane (C2H2Cl2), they have
the same molecular formula. However, they have different physical and chemical
properties. VSEPR theory predicts that all the nuclei lie in the same plane with a
trigonal planar molecular shape around each carbon atom.
Cl H
C C
H
Trans
Cl
H H
C C
Cl
Cis
Cl
The trans isomer has no dipole moment (µ = 0 D) because the C – Cl bond polarities
balance each other. In contrast, the cis-isomer is polar (µ = 1.90 D) because the
bond dipoles partially reinforce each other, with the molecular dipole pointing between
the Cl atoms.
Bond Angle
Bond angle is the angle formed by two surrounding atoms with the central atom at the
vertex. Ideal bond angles are observed when all the bonds around a central atom are
identical and connected to the same type of atom. When this is not the case, such as
when lone pairs, multiple bonds, or different surrounding atoms are present, the bond
angles deviate from the ideal angles.
Predicting the Shapes of Molecules
The geometrical shapes of some simple molecules can be predicted based on the
following general patterns:
Molecular Shapes with Two Electron Sets (Linear Arrangement-AX2
type)
The repulsion of two electron groups with each other results in the assignment on
opposite sides of the central atom in a straight line. The linear arrangement of electron
sets results in a linear molecular shape and bond angle of 180°. All AX2 type
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
149
molecules or ions are linear in geometry. The examples of the molecules of this type
are CO2, BeCl2, CS2
, HCN, etc.
Molecular shapes with three electron sets (Trigonal Planar
Arrangement, AX3
 type)
Three electron sets around the central atom repel each other to lie at the corners of
an equilateral triangle. This is the trigonal planar arrangement and the ideal bond angle
is 120°: Example: BF3, NO3
-
, HCHO (formaldehyde) etc. Another molecular shape is
possible within this electron set arrangement, with two bonding and one lone pair
(AX2E type). The examples of this type include PbCl2, SnBr2, SO2, O3, etc. They
have bent (V-shaped or angular) geometry. This is the first example of the effect of
a lone-pair on adjacent bonding-pairs. Since a lone-pair is held on the central atom, it
exerts a stronger repulsion than bonding pair.
Thus, in AX2E type species a lone-pair repels bonding-pairs more strongly than
bonding-pairs repel each other. The repulsion increases the angle between lone-pair
and bonding-pair, which decreases the angle between bonding-pairs. Note the large
decrease from the ideal 120° angle in AX2
E type molecules. (Example SnCl2 = 95°).
Molecular Shapes with Four Electrons Sets (Tetrahedral
Arrangement, AX4
 Type)
Note that AX3E and AX2E2 types are with four electron sets like AX4 type but differ
in shape and bond angle because of the presence of lone pair(s) on the central atom.
In three dimensions, the four electron sets can move farther apart and point to the
corners of a tetrahedron, giving a bond angle of 109.5o. Therefore, all molecules or
ions with four electron sets around the central atom adopt the tetrahedral arrangement.
Some of the examples of this type are CH4, + NH4 , 2 SO4
− . When one of the four
electron sets in the tetrahedral arrangement is a lone pair, the molecular shape is that
of a triagonal pyramid (AX3
E type). The measured bond angle is slightly less than the
ideal 109.5°. In ammonia (NH3), for example, the lone pair forces the N–H bonding
pairs together, and the H–N–H bond angle is 107.3°. When the four sets of electrons
around the central atom include two bonding and two non-bonding sets, the molecular
shape is bent, V-shaped or angular (AX2E2
 type). Recall that one of the shapes in the
triagonal planar arrangement - that with two bonding sets and one lone pair-is also
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
150
called angular or bent or V-shaped (AX2E type), but it is ideal bond angle is 120°,
not 109.5°. Water is the most important V-shaped molecule in the tetrahedral
arrangement of electrons. We would expect the repulsions between its two lone-pairs
have a greater effect on bond angle than the repulsions from the single lone pair in
NH3, and observation confirms this: two lone-pairs on the central O atom compress
the H–O–H bond angle to 104.5°.
Thus, for similar molecules within a given tetrahedral electron set arrangement,
electron pair repulsions cause deviation from ideal bond angles.
Figure 3.7 Molecular shape of ammonia. Figure 3.8 Molecular shape of water.
Example 3.2
Determine the molecular shape of and ideal bond angles in:
1. COCl2 2. PCl3 3. SF2
Solution:
1. For COCl2
a Write the Lewis Structure
Cl
O—C
|
|
Cl
—
b Assign the electron set arrangement: There are three sets of electrons
around carbon (two single and one double bond) gives AX3 type
molecule with a trigonal planar arrangement of electron sets.
c The ideal bond angle is 120°.
d The shape is trigonal planar.
The correct Lewis structures determine the other steps. Therefore, you have
to be sure when you sketch the structure.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
151
2. For PCl3
a Write the Lewis structure:
Cl
P
Cl Cl
b Assign the electron set arrangement. There are four electron sets
around phosphorus (three bonding and one lone pair) gives AX3E type,
a molecule with tetrahedral arrangement of electron sets.
c The ideal bond angle is 109.5°. Since there is one lone pair, the actual
bond angle should be less than 109.5°.
d PCl3 has a trigonal pyramidal shape.
3. For SF2
a Write the Lewis structure:
S
F F
b Assign the electron set arrangement:
There are four electron sets around sulphur (two bonding and two lone
pair) give AX2E2 type, a molecule with tetrahedral arrangement of
electron sets.
c The ideal bond angle is 109.5°. Since there are two lone-pairs, the
actual bond angle should be less than a tetrahedral arrangement of
electron sets with one lone-pair.
d SF2 has angular (bent) or V-shape.
S
F F
Exercise 3.9
Determine the molecular shape and ideal bond angles in
a SO4–
–2 b CS2 c H2Se
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
152
Molecular Shapes with Five Electron Sets (Trigonal Bipyramidal
Arrangements, AX5 Type)
AX4E, AX3E2 and AX2E3 types are with five electron sets around the central atom
like AX5 type but differ in shape and bond angle because of the presence of one or
more lone-pairs on the central atom. Therefore, we dare to predict that the electron
set geometry is trigonal bipyramidal.
Molecules with five or six electron sets must have a central atom from period 3 or
higher with d-orbitals available to expand its valence shell beyond eight electrons.
When five electron sets maximize their separation, they form the trigonal bipyramidal
arrangement with all five positions occupied by bonded atoms, the molecule has a
trigonal bipyramidal shape (AX5 type). Phosphorus pentachloride (PCl5) is an
example:
P— Cl
|
Cl
F
| |
|
Cl
Cl
Lone-pairs exert stronger repulsive forces than bond pairs. With one lone-pair present
(AX4E type), the molecule has a Seesaw shape. For example, SF4, XeO2F2, IF4
+,
IO2F2
_
. With two lone pairs present (AX3E2 type), the molecule has a T-Shape.
Some of the examples of this type include ClF3, BrF3, and ICl3.
Molecules with two bonding and three lone pair sets are linear in shape (AX2E3
type). The examples of this type are XeF2, I3
–, IF2
–.
Molecular Shapes with Six Sets of Electrons (Octahedral Arrangement, AX6
Type)
AX5E and AX4E2 are the two common shapes under consideration. They are with six
sets of electrons like AX6 type and exhibit similar electron arrangement around the
central atom but different molecular shapes.
With six bonding groups, the molecular shapes are octahedral (AX6 type). For
example, SF6, IOF5. Five bonded atoms and one lone pair (AX5E type) define the
square pyramidial shape. The examples of this type are BrF5, TeF5
–, XeOF4.
When a molecule has two lone pairs and four bonding set (AX4E2 type) the
positioning gives rise to the square-planar shape. The examples of this type are XeF4,
ICl4
–
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
153
Exercise 3.10
1. In which situation/s the molecular shape and the electron-set arrangement is/are
same?
2. Arrange the following AFn species in order of increasing F–A–F bond angles.
BF3, BeF2, CF4, NF3, OF2
3. In the gas-phase, phosphorus pentachloride exists as separate molecules. In
the solid phase, however, the compound is composed of alternating + PCl4 and
PCl4
− ions. What change(s) in molecular shape occur(s) as PCl5 solidifies?
How does the angle change?
4. For molecules of general formula AXn (where n > 2), how do you determine if
a molecule is polar?
5. For each of the following molecular formula (AXmEn
), A is the central atom, X
is the terminal atom, m is the number of terminal atoms bonded to the central
atom; E is the lone-pair of electrons and n is the number of lone-pairs
possessed by the central atom. The first item has been completed as an
example. Fill the rest of the table after drawing in your note book.
Number of Molecular Molecular Electron set Sketch Examples
e-pairs formula geometry geometry
2 AX2 linear linear X–A–X Cl–Be–Cl
3 AX2E
AX3
4 AX4
AX3E
AX2E2
5 AX5
AX4E
AX3E2
AX2E3
6 AX6
AX5E
AX4E2
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
154
6. Determine the molecular shape and predict the bond angles (relative to the
ideal angles) in
a SbF5 b BrF5
7. Predict the geometry of and bond angles (relative to the ideal angles) in the
following molecules and ions.
a ClO3
+ b ClO2
+ c ICl2
– d SOF4 e ClF3
8. Draw molecular shapes for the molecules/ions in question number 8.
The molecular shape of molecules with more than one central atom are different in
defferent parts of the molecule. Consider ethene (C2H4). Three bonding sets and no
lone pair are around each of the two central carbon atoms, so ethene is shaped like
two trigonal planar geometries that share a point.
C=C
H |
|
H
|
H
|
H
Ethanol (CH3CH2OH) has three central atoms. The CH3 group is tetrahedrally
shaped and the CH2 group has four bonding groups around its central C atom, so it
is also tetrahedrally shaped. The O atom has four sets of electrons, but the two lone
pairs give it a V-shape (AX2E2 type). For these types of molecules, it is easiest to
find the molecular shape around one central atom at a time. Figure 3.8 is another
example for the molecular shape of molecules with more than one central atom.
Figure 3.9 Predicted geometrical shape of the HNO3
 molecule by the VSEPR theory.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
155
3.3.2 Intermolecular Forces in Covalent Compounds
Activity 3.16
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
1. Why does a polar liquid generally have a higher normal boiling point than a nonpolar
liquid of the same molecular mass?
2. State the principal reasons why CH4 is a gas at room temperature whereas H2O is a
liquid.
3. Only one of these substances is a solid at STP: C6H5COOH, CH3(CH2)
8CH3, CH3OH,
(CH3CH2)
2O. Which do you think it is and why?
4. Only one of these substances is a gas at STP: NI3, BF3, PCl3, and CH3COOH. Which do
you think it is and why?
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
There are two types of electrostatic forces at work in any sample of matter. These
are: intramolecular and intermolecular forces. Intramolecular force which is a chemical
bond (ionic, covalent or metallic) is a force that exists within a particle (molecule or
polyatomic ion) and affects the chemical property of the species. Whereas, intermolecular
forces exist between particles and influence physical properties of the species
Intermolecular forces are due to the attraction between ions and molecules.
Intermolecular forces are relatively weak as compared to intramolecular forces,
because they typically involve lower charges that are farther apart. The charges that
give rise to intermolecular forces are farther apart because they exist between nonbonded atoms in adjacent molecules.
Activity 3.17
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. Name some intermolecular forces.
2. Cis-1,2-dichloroethene shows higher boiling point than trans-1,2 dichloroethene.
Explain.
3. Which type of compounds exhibit hydrogen bonding?
4. Name the factors on which the strength of dispersion forces of the particles depend?
5. ’Ice is lighter than water.’ Comment
Share your views with rest of the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
156
Though there are several important types of intermolecular forces, only dipole-dipole,
hydrogen bonding, and, London (Dispersion) forces, will be discussed.
Dipole-Dipole forces
When polar molecules are brought near one another, their partial charges act as tiny
electric fields that orient them and give rise to dipole-dipole forces; the partially
positive end of one molecule attracts the partially negative end of another.
For compounds of approximately the same mass and size, greater is the dipole
moment, greater is the dipole-dipole forces between their molecules, so greater is the
energy required to separate their particles. These can be manifested in several of its
physical properties. For instance, both methyl chloride (CH3Cl) and ethanal
(CH3
CHO) have comparable mass and size, but CH3Cl has a smaller dipole moment
than CH3CHO; therefore less energy is needed to overcome the dipole-dipole forces
between its molecules and it boils at a lower temperature. Dipole-dipole forces give
polar cis-1,2-dichloroethene a higher boiling point than nonpolar trans-1, 2-
dichloroethene.
Hydrogen Bonding
Hydrogen bonding is a special type of dipole-dipole forces that arise between
molecules that have a hydrogen atom bound to a smaller sized, most electronegative
atoms. These atoms are: Fluorine, Oxygen and Nitrogen. The bond formed between
hydrogen and such an atom is highly polar. The partially positive (δ+) H of one
molecule is attracted to the partially negative (δ–) lone pair on the F, O or N of the
same or another molecule. As a result a hydrogen bond result. The atom sequence
that leads to an H bond (dotted line) is indicated below. The following three
examples illustrate the sequence.
F ---- H — O — — N ---- H — F — —
O ---- H — F
—
—
Hydrogen bonds hold water molecules in a rigid but open structure. When ice melts,
some of the hydrogen bonds break. Water molecules move into the holes that are in the
ice structures. The molecules are therefore closer together in liquid water than in ice.
This means that liquid water at 0°C is denser than ice. Water is most unusual in this
regard. When water on the surface of lakes and other areas freezes, the ice floats on
the liquid water. If the solid were denser than the liquid as is true for nearly every other
substance, the surface of the lake would freeze and sink until the entire lake was solid;
aquatic plants and animals would be endangered.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
157
Dispersion or London Forces
Intermolecular forces in which non-polar atoms or molecules interact by inducing
dipoles in each other are known as dispersion or London Forces. These classes of
intermolecular forces cause substances like CO2
, Cl2
, noble gases, etc, to condense and
solidify. An attractive force must be acting between these non-polar molecules and
atoms, or they would remain gaseous under any conditions. In fact, bond dipoles exert
some weak attraction but the intermolecular forces are mainly responsible for the
condensed state of non-polar substance. These forces are known as London forces or
dispersion forces, named after Fritz London, the physicist who explained the quantum
mechanical basis of the attractive forces.
Dispersion forces are very weak and are caused by a sudden shift of electron density
to one side of the nucleus than the other. So the molecule has an instantaneous dipole.
These instantaneous dipole will induce the neighbouring non-polar molecule. As a result,
an induced-dipole is created. This process occurs throughout the sample and keeps the
particles together. These dipoles are collectively known as dispersion forces or London
forces. They are present between all particles (atoms, ions, and molecules.)
For substance with the same molar masses, the strength of the dispersion forces is
often influenced by molecular geometry (shape). Shapes that allow more points of
contact have more area over which electron clouds can be distorted, so stronger
attractions result. This is probably the reason why n-pentane (CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3)
exhibits higher boiling point than its isomer 2,2-dimethyl propane.
C
|
CH3
CH3
|
H3C |
|
CH3
Table 3. 1 Strength and polarity of intermolecular forces
Intermolecular force Strength Polarity
Hydrogen Bonding The Strongest Polar
Dipole-dipole Forces Moderate Polar
London Dispersion Forces The Weakest Non-polar
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
158
Exercise 3.11
1. In which of the following substances do hydrogen bonds occur? Explain with
the help of diagrams.
a CH4 b CH3CH2OH
c
O
R C C OH
NH2
2. Identify the dominant intermolecular force that is present in each of the
following substance and select the substance with the higher boiling point in
each pair:
a CH3OH or CH3CH2OH c MgCl2 or PCl3
b Hexane or cyclohexane d CH3NH2 or CH3F
3. Which type of intermolecular force is dominant in the following substances?
a ICl b H2O
c F2 d HBr
4. Compare intermolecular forces with that of intramolecular bonding.
3.4 METALLIC BONDING
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• explain how metallic bond is formed;
• explain the properties of metals related to the concept of bonding; and
• carryout an activity to investigate the conductivity, malleability and ductility of some
metals and non-metals (Al, Cu, Fe, Sn, Zn, S, C charcoal, C graphite and Si).
3.4.1 Formation of Metallic Bonding
Activity 3.18
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. Two characteristics that lead to an element being classified as a metal.
2. Type of bond existing in solid copper.
3. What is delocalisation of electrons?
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
159
In simple terms, metallic bonding is referred to as bonding in metal atoms. It is also
defined as interaction between metal nuclei and the delocalized electrons. Delocalized
electrons are also called as conduction electrons. Metals nuclei are the positive ions
and so metallic bonding can be imagined as sea of electrons in which positive metal
ions are embedded. Positive metal ions are called Kernels. Thus metallic bonding can
be summarized as: The force of attraction which binds together the positive metal ions
or Kernels with the electrons within its sphere of influence.
Is a metal made up of atoms or ions?
The strength of the metallic bond depends on the:
1. number of electrons in the delocalised 'sea' of electrons. (More delocalised
electrons results in a stronger bond and a higher melting point.)
2. packing arrangement of the metal atoms.
(The more closely packed the atoms are the stronger the bond is and the
higher the melting point.)
3.4.2 Electron-Sea Model
The electron-sea model of metallic bonding proposes that all the metal atoms in the
sample contribute their valence electrons to from "sea" of electrons, which is not
localized for a particular atom. The metal ions (the nuclei with their core electrons)
are submerged within this electron sea in an orderly array. See Figure 3.10.
4. Electron sea model.
5. Even though so much energy is required to form a metal cation with a 2+ charge,
the alkaline earth metals form halides with general formula MX2 rather than MX.
Explain.
Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
160
delocalized electron
metal ion
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
e– e– e– e–
e e – –
e–
e–
e–
e– e–
e–
e–
e–
e– e–
–
Figure 3.10 Schematic illustrations of electron-sea model for the electronic structure of
metals.
In contrast to ionic bonding, the metal ions are not held in place as rigidly as in ionic
solid. In contrast to covalent bonding, no particular pair of metal atoms is bonded
through any localized pair of electrons. Rather, the valence electrons are shared
among all the atoms in the substance, which is held together by the mutual attraction
of the metal cations for the mobile, highly delocalized electrons. An electron-pair in a
covalent resonance hybrid is delocalized over only a few atoms, but the extent of
delocalization in metal is much greater. The bonding-electrons are free to move
throughout the three dimensional structure.
3.4.3 Properties of Metals Related to the Concept of
Bonding
Activity 3.19
 Form a group and perform the following activity:
1. Take a piece of metal and a piece of wood of the same size.
2. Let these remain on a table so that both attain room temperature.
3. Place your left hand on the metal and right one on the wood.
What do you observe? Which hand feels colder? Why?
Discuss and share your findings with rest of the class..
The general properties of metals include malleability and ductility and most are strong
and durable. They are good conductors of heat and electricity. Their strength indicates
that the atoms are difficult to separate, but malleability and ductility suggest that the
atoms are relatively easy to move in various directions. These properties suggest the
nature of the metallic bonding between atoms.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
161
Metallic bonds show typical metallic properties such as high electrical conductivity,
lustre, and high heat conductivity. Metals are good conductors of electricity and heat
because of their mobile electrons. They are strong and opaque in nature.
Most metals are malleable, which means that they can be hammered into thin sheets,
and ductile, which means that they can be drawn into wires. These properties indicate
that the atoms of the metallic lattice are capable of slipping with respect to one
another. When a piece of metal is struck by a hammer, the metal ions move to a new
lattice positions, sliding past each other through intervening electrons.
Most metals are solids with high melting and much higher boiling points; because the
atoms of metals have strong attractive forces between them and much energy is
required to overcome this force. For instance, the increase in melting point between
the alkali metals [Group IA] and the alkaline earth metals [Group IIA] can be
explained by the IIA metals having two valence electrons, available for metallic
bonding, whereas the IA metals have only one. The greater attraction between the
M2+ ions and twice the number of mobile electrons mean that higher temperatures are
needed to melt such solid. The metals have a wide range of melting points, (from -
39°C (mercury) to 3410°C (tungsten).
The properties of metals suggest that their atoms possess strong bonds, yet the ease
of conduction of heat and electricity suggest that electrons can move freely in all
directions in a metal. The general observations give rise to a picture of "positive ions
in a sea of electrons" to describe metallic bonding.
Activity 3.20
Form a group and discuss the following questions:
1. Use the periodic table to arrange the following in order of increasing melting point K,
Br2, Mg and O2. Explain the reason for the order you choose.
2. List four physical characteristics of a solid metal .
3. Briefly account for the following relative values:
 a Lithium boils at 1317°C and melts at 179°C. The boiling point is about 1138°C
higer than its melting point.
 b The melting point of Li and Be are 180°C and 1287°C, respectively.
 c The melting point of sodium is 89°C, where as that of potassium is 63°C.
4. For each of the following pairs, which element will have the greater metallic
character:
a Li or Be b Li or Na c Sn or Pb d B or Al?
 Explain briefly. Share your ideas with the rest of the class.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
162
Group Assignment
Form a group and do as directed:
1. You have been provided with aluminium, copper, iron, tin, zinc, charcoal, graphite and
silicon. Complete the following table on your notebook. Perform experiment if
required.
Sample Conductivity Malleability Ductility
Aluminium
Copper
Iron
Tin
Zinc
Charcoal
Graphite
Silicon
2. Can you classify the samples as metal or non-metal?
3. Prepare another table and tabulate more properties of metals.
3.5 CHEMICAL BONDING THEORIES
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• name two chemical bond theories;
• explain the valence bond theory;
• distinguish the Lewis model and the valence bond model;
• discuss the overlapping of orbitals in covalent bond formation;
• explain hybridization;
• show the process of hybridization involved in some covalent molecules;
• draw hybridization diagram for the formation of sp, sp2, sp3, sp3d and sp3d2
hybrids;
• suggest the kind of hybrid orbitals on the basis of the electron structure of the
central atom;
• predict the geometrical shapes of some simple molecules on the basis of
hybridization and the nature of electron pairs.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
163
• discuss the hybridization involved in compounds containing multiple bonds;
• explain bond length and bond strength;
• explain molecular orbital theory;
• describe molecular orbital-using atomic orbitals;
• describe bonding and anti bonding molecular orbitals;
• draw molecular orbital energy level diagrams for homonuclear diatomic
molecules;
• write the electron configuration of simple molecules using the molecular orbital
model;
• define bond order and determine the bond order of some simple molecules
and molecule-ions;
• determine the stability of a molecule or an ion using its bond order; and
predict magnetic properties of molecules.
The two modern chemical bonding theories which use quantum mechanics are the
Valence Bond Theory (VBT) and the Molecular Orbital Theory (MOT).
3.5.1 Valence Bond Theory (VBT)
Lewis theory provides a simple, qualitative way to describe covalent bonding, and
VSEPR theory allows us to carry the description further. Probable molecular shapes
were predicted by VSEPR theory. Now consider a quantum mechanical approach to
covalent bonding that confirms much of what is described through VSEPR theory, but
which allows extending that description still further. The valence-bond approach is the
most useful approach to answer questions like: what is a covalent bond? And how
can we explain molecular shapes from the interaction of atomic orbitals?
The basic principle of valence bond theory is that a covalent bond forms when
orbitals of two atoms overlap and the overlap region, which is between the nuclei, is
occupied by a pair of electrons.
For instance, form an image in your mind of two hydrogen atoms approaching one
another. The moment they get closer, their electron-charge clouds begin to combine
into a whole. This intermingling is described as the overlap of the 1s orbitals of the
two atoms. The overlap results in an increased electron charge-density in the region
between the atomic nuclei. The increased density of negative charge serves to hold the
positively-charged atomic nuclei together. In the valence bond (VB) method, a
covalent bond is a region of high electron charge-density that results from the overlap
of atomic orbitals between two atoms.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
164
The strength of the bond between any two atoms generally depends on the extent of
the overlap between the two orbitals. As the two atoms are brought more closely
together, however, the repulsion of the atomic nuclei becomes more important than the
electron-nucleus attraction and the bond become unstable. For each bond, then, there
is a condition of optimal orbital overlap that leads to a maximum bond strength (bond
energy) at a particular internuclear distance (bond length). The valence bond method
attempt to find the best approximation to this condition for all the bonds in a molecule.
The bonding of two hydrogen atoms into a hydrogen molecule through the overlap of
their 1s orbitals is pictured in Figure 3.11.
1s1
1s1
Figure 3.11 Atomic orbital overlap and bonding in H2 .
Note! The s orbital is spherical, but p and d orbitals have particular orientations -
more electron density in one direction than in another - so a bond involving p or d
orbitals will tend to be oriented in the direction that maximizes overlap.
Hydrogen, H2
1s
H
1s
H 1s 1s
H2
3p
Cl
Cl
Cl
3p 3p
Cl
Chlorine, Cl2
Cl
Cl
1s
H
Hydrogen Chloride, HCl
Figure 3.12 Oribital and spin pairing in three diatomic molecules.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
165
In the HCl bond, for example, the 1s orbital of hydrogen overlaps the half-filled 3p
orbital of Cl along the axis of that orbital. In Figure 3.11B any other direction would
result in less overlap and, thus, a weaker bond. Similarly, in the Cl–Cl bond of Cl2
,
the two 3p orbitals interact end-to-end, that is along the orbital axes, to attain
maximum overlap (Figure 3.11C).
VSEPR theory predicts a tetrahedral bond angle (109.5°) in H2S. However, if we
take in to account the strong repulsions between the lone pairs of electrons on the S
atom and the bond pairs, bonds are expected to be forced into a smaller angle. The
measured bond angle in the H2S molecule is 92.1°, suggesting that the valence bond
method describes the covalent bonding in H2S better than the VSEPR theory does
(see Figure 3.12). There are not many cases, however, where the VB method
produces superior results. A combination of VSEPR theory and the VB method are
used in describing the shape of the molecules.
H
1s
H s
H
3pz 3py
3pz
H
H
s
S : [Ne]    
3s 3p
Figure 3.13 Atomic oribital overlap and bonding in H2
S.
Overlap of Atomic Orbitals (Sigma and Pi Bonds)
To see the detailed makeup of covalent bonds, it is essential to focus on the mode by
which orbitals overlap because orbital overlap is necessary for sharing of electrons
and bond formation. Various type of atomic orbital overlap leads to covalent bond
formation. Three simple basic ones are s-s , s-p and p-p shown in Figure 3.13.
1. s-s overlap in which half filled s orbitals overlap,
2. s-p overlap where half filled s orbital of one atom overlaps with one of the p
orbital having one electron only and
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
166
3. p-p overlap in which two half filled p orbitals overlap.
s s s – s overlap
The s – s overlap
y x
p
z
s
The s – p overlap
s – p overlap
y x
p Orbital p Orbital p – p overlap along the orbital axis
z
y x
z
The p – p overlap along the orbital axis
A
B
C
y y yy
py py p – p sideways overlap
The p – p side ways overlap
D
Figure 3.14 Atomic orbital overlap.
(A) s-s overlap, (B) s-p overlap, (C) p-p overlap along the orbital axis and
(D) p-p sideways overlap.
Because of the directional nature of p orbital, the overlap may take place in two
ways: (i) the half filled p orbitals along the line joining the two nuclei. This is called as
head on, end-to-end, end on or linear overlap and (ii) the half filled p orbitals overlap
along the line perpendicular to the nuclear axis. This overlapping of p orbitals is
parallel to each other, hence is called lateral or sideways overlapping. These two
modes give rise to the two types of covalent bonds, namely, sigma (σ) and pi (π)
bond respectively. Valence bond theory is used to describe the two types here, but
they are essential features of molecular orbital theory as well. s - s and s - p will
always overlap along the nuclear axis, hence results only in sigma bonds.
Sigma bond has its highest electron density along the bond axis (an imaginary line
joining the nuclei) in between the bonded nuclei. All single bonds have their electron
density concentrated along the bond axis, and thus are sigma bonds.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
167
A side - to - side or parallel overlap forms another type of covalent bond called a pi
(π) bond. It has two regions of electron density. One above and one below the sigma
bond axis. One π-bond holds two electrons that occupy both regions of the bond. A
double-bond always consists of one σ and one π bond. The double-bond increases
electron density between the nuclei. A triple bond consists of one σ and two π bonds.
Now it can be seen clearly why a double and triple bonds were considered as one
electron set in the discussion of VSEPR. The reason is that each electron pair
occupies a distinct orbital, a specific region of electron density, so repulsions are
reduced.
The extent of overlap influences bond strength, however, many factors, such as lone -
pair repulsions, bond polarities, and other electrostatic contributions affect overlap and
the relative strength of σ and π bonds between other pairs of atoms. Thus as a rough
approximation, a double bond is about twice as strong as a single bond, and a triple
bond is about three times as strong.
Hybridization of Orbitals
Valence bond theory employs the concept of hybridization. It is the overlap or
blending of s, p and d orbitals to explain bond formation.
In applying the valence bond method to the ground state electron configuration of
carbon you can assume that the filled 1s orbital will not be involved in the bonding
and focus your attention on the valence-shell orbitals.
Ground State C:
1s 2s 2p
From its ground state configuration, two unpaired electrons in the 2p subshell are
observed. One can predict the simplest hydrocarbon molecule to be CH2, by
overlapping the two unpaired electrons from two H atoms with the two unpaired
electrons of carbon. However, you might question the existence of this molecule
because it does not follow the octet rule. In fact, experiment shows that CH2 is not a
stable molecule. The simplest stable hydrocarbon is methane, CH4. To account for
this, you need an orbital diagram that shows four unpaired electrons in the valence
shell of carbon, requiring four bonds (and therefore four atoms of hydrogen). To get
such a diagram imagine that one of the 2s electrons is promoted to the empty 2p
orbital. To excite the 2s electron to a higher energy sublevel, energy must be
absorbed. The resulting electron configuration is that of an excited state having energy
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
168
greater than the configuration in the ground state.
Excited State C:
1s 2s 2p
Valence bond theory proposes that the one 2s and all three 2p orbitals of the carbon
atom 'mix' to produce four new orbitals that are equivalent to each other in energy
and in shape and pointing in different directions with equal H–C–H bond angles. This
blending is called hybridization and the resultant orbital as hybrid orbitals. It is a
hypothetical process (not an observed one) that can be carried out as a quantum
mechanical calculation. The symbols used for hybrid orbitals identify the kinds and
numbers of atomic orbitals used to form the hybrids.
In hybridization scheme, the number of new hybrid orbitals is equal to the total
number of atomic orbitals that are combined.
Hybridization provides a useful and convenient method of predicting the shapes of
molecules. It must be noted that though it is valuable in predicting and describing the
shape, it does not explain the reason for the shape.
Exercise 3.12
1. How do carbon and silicon differ with regard to the types of orbitals available
for hybridization? Explain
2. Are these statements true or false? Correct any that is false.
a Two σ bonds comprise a double bond.
b A triple-bond consists of one π bond and two σ bonds.
c Bonds formed from atomic s orbitals are always σ bonds.
d A π-bond consists of two pairs of electrons
e End-to-end overlap results in a bond with electron density above and
below the bond axis.
sp hybrid orbitals
When two electron sets surround the central atom, you observe a linear molecular
shape. VB theory explains this by proposing that mixing two non-equivalent orbitals of
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
169
a central atom one s and one p, gives rise to two equivalent sp hybrid orbitals that lie
180° apart. Combination (mixing) of one s and one p orbital is called sp hybridization
and the resultant orbitals are called sp hybrid orbitals.
For instance, the beryllium atom has two electrons and four orbitals in its valence
shell. In the triatomic molecule BeCl2, which is present in gaseous BeCl2 at high
temperatures, the 2s and one of the 2p orbitals of the Be atom are hybridized into sp
hybrid orbitals. The remaining two 2p orbitals are left unhybridized and unoccupied in
the orbital diagram.
Since there are no unpaired electrons this atom cannot form any covalent bonds. It
follows that in BeCl2, the Be atom is not in the ground state but it is in the excited
state, with sufficient extra energy to unpair a 2s electron.
2s 2p
Ground state Be:
2s 2p
sp 2p
Excited state Be:
sp hybrid orbitals:
As shown in Figure 3.15 the two sp hybrid orbitals are directed along a straight line,
180° apart. It is predicted that the BeCl2 molecule should be linear, and this
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
Hybridization
Figure 3. 15 The sp-hybridization scheme illustrated.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
170
prediction is confirmed by experimental evidence. Most examples of sp hybridization
are found in organic molecules, especially those with triple bonds.
sp2
 hybrid orbitals
Now turn your attention to boron, a Group IIIA element. The boron atom has four
orbitals but only three electrons in its valence shell. In most boron compounds the
hybridization scheme combines one 2s and two 2p orbitals into three sp2 hybrid
orbitals. Using orbital diagrams to represent this hybridization, we have
sp2
 hybrization for B
2s 2p
Ground state B:
2s 2p
2p
Excited state B:
sp hybrid orbitals: 2
sp
2
The atom in its ground state has only one unpaired electron, so that it can form only
one covalent bond, but in the excited state there are three unpaired electrons, hence
three bonds can be formed.
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
s px py
Hybridization
Figure 3.16 The sp2
 hybridization scheme illustrated.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
171
As shown in Figure 3.15 the sp2
 hybrid orbitals are distributed geometrically within a
plane at 120° angles. The valence bond method predicts that BCl3 is a trigonal planar
molecule with 120° Cl–B–Cl bond angle. This indeed is what is observed
experimentally.
By far the most common examples of sp2 hybridization are found in organic molecules
with double bonds.
sp3
 hybridization
Carbon, the central atom in a molecule of methane CH4 has only two unpaired
electrons in the ground state. The two electrons in the 2p level are not paired, i.e., put
into the same box, in accordance with Hund's rule. Carbon in its excited state can
form four bonds. The one 2s and three 2p-orbitals of carbon are mixed to produce
four new orbitals that are equivalent to each other in energy and in shape, but pointing
in different directions, as shown in Figure 3.17.
sp3
 hybridization for carbon
2s 2p
2s 2p
sp
3
Ground state C:
Excited state C:
sp hybrid orbitals: 3
The four sp3 hybrid orbitals point to the corners of a regular tetrahedron, and make a
bond angle of 109.50° in CH4 (Figure 3.17).
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
172
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
z
y
x
Hybridization
Figure 3.17 The sp3
 hybridization.
C
Figure 3.18 sp3
 Hybrid orbitals and bonding in methane scheme illustrated.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
173
We might also expect to use sp3 hybridization not only for structures of the type AX4
type (as in CH4), but also for AX3E type (as in NH3) and AX2E2 type (as in H2O).
Nitrogen has three unpaired electrons in its ground state, sufficient to form three
bonds; so it is not necessary to excite the atom. sp3 hybridization of the central atom
N in NH3
2s 2p
sp
3
Ground state N:
sp
3
hybrid orbitals:
accounts for the formation of three N–H bonds and a lone-pair of electrons on the N
atom (Figure 3.19). The predicted H–N–H bond angles of 109.5° are close to the
experimentally observed angles of 107°.
N
Figure 3.19 sp3
 hybrid orbitals and bonding in NH3 .
A similar scheme for H2O accounts for the formation of two O–H bonds and two
lone-pairs of electrons on the oxygen atom.
2s 2p
sp
3
Ground state O:
sp
3
hybrid orbitals:
The predicted H–O–H bond angle of 109.5° is also reasonably close to the observed
angle of 104.5°. As in our discussion of the VSEPR theory, we can explain somewhat
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
174
smaller than tetrahedral bond angles in NH3
 and H2
O in terms of repulsions involving
lone-pair electrons.
sp3
d hybridization
A maximum of eight valence electrons can be accommodated by any hybridization
scheme involving only s and p orbitals. Hybridization schemes for structures involving
expanded octets must include additional orbitals and these extra orbitals can come
from a d-subshell.
For example, we need five hybrid orbitals to describe bonding in PCl5
. In a gaseous
molecule of phosphorus pentachloride, PCl5
, the central atom phosphorus has only
three unpaired electrons in its ground state. Electrons must be unpaired to provide the
correct number of unpaired electrons for bond formation.
3s 3p
Ground state P:
sp3
d hybrid orbitals:
3d
Excited state P:
3s 3p 3d
sp3
d 3d
Five orbitals are being used and sp3d hybridization occurs, giving a trigonal
bipyramidal structure. The sp3d hybrid orbital and their trigonal bipyramidal structure
is shown in Figure 3.20.
P
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Figure 3.20 The sp3
d hybrid orbitals in the molecule of PCl5
.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
175
Like other hybrid orbitals we have considered, the five sp3d hybrid orbitals are
arranged in a symmetrical fashion, but unlike the other case, the five sp3
d orbitals are
not all equivalent. Three of the orbitals are directed in the plane of the central atom at
120° angles with one another; the remaining two are perpendicular to the plane of the
other three. The three positions in the central plane are called the equatorial positions
and the two positions perpendicular to the plane are called axial positions.
Hybridization may take place only between orbitals of roughly the same energy. It
follows that it is not possible to hybridize the 2s or 2p levels with the 3s, or the 3s or
3p level with the 4s. The d levels are intermediate in energy, and may in certain
circumstance be used with the energy levels either below or above, that is 3s with 3d,
and 3d with 4s are both possible.
sp3
d2
 Hybridization
Another structure featuring an expanded octet is SF6. Here, six hybrid orbitals are
required in order to describe bonding. These are obtained through the hybridization
scheme sp3d2, represented by the orbital diagrams.
3s 3p 3d
Excited state S:
3s 3p 3d
sp3
d
2 3d
Ground state S:
sp3
d : 2 hybrid orbitals
The sp3d2 hybrid orbitals and their octahedral orientation are shown in Figure 3.21.
S F F
F
F
F
F
Figure 3.21 The sp3
d2 hybrid orbitals SF6
.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
176
In hybridization schemes, one hybrid orbital is produced for every single atomic orbital
involved. In a molecule, each of the hybrid orbitals of the central atom acquires an
electron pair, either a bond-pair or a lone-pair. And the hybrid orbitals have the same
orientation as the electron-set arrangement predicted by VSEPR theory.
When one describes the probable hybridization scheme for a structure, he/she must
choose a scheme that conforms to experimental evidence. This can be done by mixing
the VSEPR and valence bond approaches. The procedure is outlined in the following
four steps and illustrated in Example 3.4.
1. Write a reasonable Lewis structure for the species
2. Use VSEPR theory to predict the electron-set arrangement of the central
atom
3. Select the hybridization scheme that correspond to the VSEPR prediction
4. Describe the orbital overlap
Example 3.3
Describe a hybridization scheme for the central atom of iodine pentafluoride,
IF5.
Solution:
a The reasonable Lewis structure for IF5 is
I
F
F
F
F
F
b VSEPR predicts an octahedral electron-set arrangement for six electron
pairs (AX6 type)
c The hybridization scheme corresponding to octahedral electron arrangement
is sp3d2
d The six sp3d2 hybrid orbitals are directed to the corners of an octahedron,
but one of the orbitals is occupied by a lone pair of electrons (shown in red
below).
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
177
sp d
3 2 hybrid orbitals in I:
sp d
3 2 5d
The resulting molecular shape is that of a square pyramid with bond angles of
approximately 90°.
Exercise 3.13
1. Name the three types of hybrid orbitals that may be formed by an atom
with only s and p orbitals in its valence shell. Draw the shapes of the
hybrid orbitals so produced.
2. Describe a hybridization scheme for the central atom and molecular
geometry of the triiodide ion, I
3
–.
The use of VSEPR theory to predict geometric structures of molecules and
polyatomic ions with double and triple covalent bonds has already been described..
When you combine this knowledge with the valence bond method, you gain additional
insight. For example, the Lewis structure of ethene (ethylene) is depicted as
H
C
H
H C H
With VSEPR theory you predicted that the electron set geometry around each carbon
atom is trigonal planar (AX3
 type). This corresponds to H–C–H bond angles of 120°.
To account for these bond angles in the valence bond method, you assume that the 2s
and two of the 2p orbitals of the valence shell combine to produce sp2 hybridization
of the two carbon atoms.
sp2
hybrid orbitals of first C:
sp2
sp2
hybrid orbitals of second C:
sp2
2p
2p
All the C–H bonds in C2H4
 are formed by the overlap of sp2 hybrid orbitals of the
C atoms with 1s orbitals of the H atom, with these orbitals directed along hypothetical
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
178
lines joining the nuclei of the bonded atoms. A double covalent bond consists of one
σ and one π bond. The features of a double bond described here are illustrated in
Figure 3.22.
H
H

 


H
H 

C C
H 1s
H 1s H 1s
H 1s
2 2
C C
Figure 3.22 Bonding in ethylene, C2H4
.
VSEPR theory describes H2C = CH2 as consisting of two planar CH2 groups, each
with a 120° H–C–H bond angle. But it does not tell us how the two groups are
oriented with respect to one another. Are they both in the same plane? Is one
perpendicular to the other? The valence bond description of a double-bond gives the
answer. The maximum sidewise overlap between the unhybridized 2p orbitals to form
a π bond occurs when both CH2 groups lie in the same plane. Ethene is a planar
molecule. If one CH2 group is twisted out of the plane of the other, the extent of
overlap of the 2p orbitals is reduced, the π bond is weakened, and the molecule
becomes less stable.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
179
Aside from the restriction in rotation about a double bond just described, electron
pairs in π bonds do not fix the positions of bonded atoms to one another. These
positions are established by the σ bonds, the so-called sigma-bond frame-work, and
there is only one σ bond framework because all the electrons in a multiple covalent
bond constitute a single electron set.
We can describe a triple covalent bond in a manner similar to that just used for a
double bond. Consider the Ethyne (acetylene) molecule, C2H2. Its Lewis structure is
H — C ≡≡≡ C — H
The molecule is linear, with 180° H–C–C bond angles, as predicted by VSEPR
theory and confirmed by experiment. To account for these bond angles with the
valence bond method, we assume sp hybridization of the valence shell orbitals of the
two C atoms.
sp2
hybrid orbitals of first C- atom:
sp
sp2
hybrid orbitals of second C-atom:
sp 2p
2p
In the C ≡≡≡ C bond in C2H2, as in all triple bonds, one bond is a σ-bond and two
are π- bonds.
The bonding scheme in acetylene is illustrated in Figure 3.23.
H 1s H 1s
C C
2pz 2pz
2py
C C
2py
C
C
H
H




(a) (b) (c)
Figure 3.23 Bonding in acetylene, C2
H2
.
Exercise 3.14
1. Describe a hybridization scheme for the central atom S and the molecule
geometry of
a SO3 and b SO2
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
180
2. Describe a hybridization scheme for the central atom and the molecular
geometry of CO2.
3. Discuss the bonding in nitrate ion, predict the ideal bond angles, bond
length, shape of the ion, the number of sigma and pi bonds.
 3.5.2 Molecular Orbital Theory (MOT)
Molecular orbital theory is a method of accounting for covalent bonds that depends
on quantum theory and mathematical principles. This theory is based on the fact that
electrons are not the substantive little dots as we portray in Lewis structures. We can
speak only about energy levels/spatial probabilities when reckoning with them. We do
this reckoning by thinking of quantized electron distribution as atomic orbitals (AOs )
[spdf].
Combination of Atomic Orbitals
Atomic orbitals are capable of combining or overlapping, to produce new electron
distributions called molecular orbitals (MOs) – one MO for every AO. The quantum
mechanical treatment of electrons in atoms as matter waves yields atomic orbitals
(AOs). A similar treatment applied to electrons in molecules yields molecular orbitals
(MOs), which are mathematical descriptions of regions of high electron charge density
in a molecule. It is easy to understand molecular orbital theory in principle; we seek
an arrangement of appropriately placed atomic nuclei and electrons to produce an
energetically favourable, stable molecule. The difficulty comes in practice, in trying to
construct a wave equation for a system of several particles. The usual approach is to
write approximate wave equations by relating them to atomic orbitals.
Bonding and Anti-Bonding Molecular Orbitals
Bonding molecular orbitals have a region of high electron density between the nuclei.
Anti-bonding molecular orbitals have region of zero electron density (a node) between
the nuclei. Typical results are like those shown for H2 molecule in Figure 3.23. In
place of atomic orbitals of the separated atoms, the molecular orbitals for the united
atoms are obtained, and these are of two types. One type, a bonding molecular
orbital, places a high electron charge density in between the two nuclei and the other
type, an anti-bonding molecular orbital, places a high electron charge density away
from the region between the two nuclei. Electrons in bonding orbitals contribute to
bond formation and electrons in anti-bonding orbitals detract from bond formation.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
181
When two atomic orbitals overlap end-to-end, they form two sigma-molecular orbitals
(MOs). Consider the H2 molecule, which has two H atoms and therefore two 1s
AOs. The two 1s atomic orbitals combine (see Figure 3.23) to produce two σ MOs,
which differ in energy and location. One of the σ MOs is a bonding orbital, denoted
σ1s
, the other is an anti-bonding orbital denoted σ∗
1s
.
The relative energy levels of these two MOs are different. The σ1s
 MO has a lower
energy than the original 1s AOs, while the σ*
1s MO has a higher energy.
Electron Configuration of Diatomic Molecules
After applying two principles of filling orbitals
• The aufbau principle and
• The Pauli exclusion principle
we can predict that both electrons in H2 will go into the lower energy orbital denoted
by (σ1s
)2. A molecular-orbital diagram shows the relative energy and number of
electrons in each MO, as well as the atomic orbitals from which they form. Figure
3.24 is the molecular orbital diagram for H2.
Antibonding MO
1s
*
1s 1s
1s
Energy
Bonding MO
Figure 3.24 Molecular orbital diagram and bonding in the H2 molecule.
There are no more electrons in H2 so the σ1s
* orbital remains empty in the ground
state.
Note! The number of molecular orbitals formed must equal the number of atomic
orbitals available for combination. Unfilled molecular orbitals are considered to be
there, even when there are no electrons in them.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
182
Exercise 3.15
Draw a molecular orbital energy diagrams for
a C–
2 b C2 c C+
2
The order of energy of molecular orbitals has been determined mainly from
spectroscopic data.
a In simple homonuclear diatomic molecules (total electrons = 14 or less) the
order is:
( ) ( ) ** * * *
112 2 2 2 2 2 y z 2 2 x y z x s sss p p p p p p σσσσ σ σ π =π π =π
b For simple homonuclear diatomic molecules (total electrons greater than 14)
the ( ) 2 2 y z π =π p p comes after σ2px
 and the order is:
σ1s σ*
1s σ2s σ*
2s σ2px
 (π2py
 = π2pz
) (π*
2py
 = π*
2pz
) σ*
2px
.
Note that the 2py
 atomic orbital give π bonding and π antibonding (π*) MOs of the
same energy as those produced from 2pz orbitals. The π2py
 and π2pz 
orbitals are said
to be double degenerate, and similarly π∗
2py 
and π∗
2pz 
are double degenerate. A similar
arrangement of MOs exists from σ3s
 to σ∗
3px
, but the energies are known with less
certainty.
The Aufbau principle is used to derive the electronic structure of some simple diatomic
molcules or molecule ions. The total number of electrons from the two atoms which
make the molecule are filled into molecular orbitals. The MOs of lowest energy are
filled first, each MO holds two electrons of opposite spins and when orbitals are
degenerate, Hund’s rule applies and electrons are not paired.
Example 3.4
Use the molecular orbital theory to derive the electron configuration of
a H2
+ b Li2 c He2
+ d O2. Which of these molecules or molecules ions
exist?
Solution:
a H2
+ molecule ion. This may be considered as a combination of H atom and a
H+ ion, giving one electron to be accommodated in a MO;
b Li2 molecule. Each Li atom has two electrons in its inner shell, and one in its
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
183
outer shell, making a total of six electrons arranged:
 (σ1s)
2 (σ*
1s
)
2 (σ2s
)
2
c He2
+ Molecule ion. If this is considered as a He atom and a He+ ion there are
three electrons, which are arranged. The filled bonding orbital gives
stabilization whilst the half-filled gives destabilization. Overall, there is some
stabilization, so the helium molecule ion should exist, and it has been observed
spectroscopically.
(σ1s)
2 (σ*
1s
)
2
d O2
 molecule. Each oxygen has eight electrons, making a total of sixteen for the
molecule. These are arranged:
(σ1s)
2 (σ∗
1s)
2 (σ2s)
2 (σ∗
2s)
2 (σ2px
)
2 
( )
( )
2
2
2
2

 π

 π 
y
z
p
p
( )
( )
1 *
2
1 *
2
 π 

 π 
py
z p
The anti bonding (π*
2py
) and (π*
2pz
) orbitals are singly occupied in accordance with
Hund's rule. As in previous examples, the inner shell does not participate in
bonding and the bonding and antibonding 2s orbitals cancel each other. A σ bond
results form the filling of (σ2px
)
2. Two half π bonds arise form π2pz
 and π2py
bonding and
antibonding. Therefore, 
1 1 1 2
2 2
σ+ π+ π= bonds are formed.
Exercise 3.16
Use the molecular orbital theory and derive the electron configuration of the
following molecules. Identify those which exist and do not exist.
a He2 b Be2 c B2 d C2 e N2
Bond Order
The term bond order is used to indicate whether a covalent bond is single (bond
order = 1), double (bond order = 2) or triple (bond order = 3). For example, in a
molecular orbital treatment of oxygen, a sigma bond results from the filling of (σ2px)
2
.
Since (π∗
2py)
1 is half-filled therefore cancels half the effect of (π2py)
2, half a pi bond
results. Similarly another half pi bond arise from π2pz
and π∗
2pz, giving a total of
1 1 1 2
2 2
σ+ π+ π= . The bond order is said to be 2, and it can be calculated in the
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
184
above manner, or by calculating the number of electrons occupying bonding orbitals
minus the number of electrons in antibonding orbitals, all divided by two.
1 Number of e in Number of e in Bond order
2 bonding MOs antibonding MOs
− −      = −     
    
Activity 3.21
Form a group and use the MO theory to predict the bond order and the number of
unpaired electrons in O2–
2 , O–
2 , O+
2 , NO and CO.
Share your findings with the rest of the class.
Magnetic Properties
A species with unpaired electrons exhibits paramagnetic property. The species is
attracted by an external magnetic field. A species in which all the electrons are paired,
exhibits diamagnetism. Such species are not attracted (and, in fact, are slightly
repelled) by a magnetic field.
The antibonding π∗
2py 
and π∗
2pz 
orbitals for O2 are singly occupied in accordance with
Hund's rule. Unpaired electrons give rise to paramagnetsim. Since there are two
unpaired electrons with parallel spins, this explains why oxygen is paramagnetic. This
was the first success of the MO theory in successfully predicting the paramagnetisim of
O2
, a fact not even thought of with VB representation of the oxygen molecule (O == O).
Exercise 3.17
1. What is the bond order for CN–, CN and CN+?
2. Which homonuclear diatomic molecules of the second period elements,
besides O2
, should be paramagnetic?
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
185
3.6 TYPES OF CRYSTALS
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• define a crystal;
• name the four types of crystalline solids and give examples;
• mention the types of attractive forces that exist within each type of crystalline
solids;
• describe the properties of each type of crystalline solids; and
• build a model of sodium chloride crystal structure.
A crystal is a piece of a solid substance that has plane surface, sharp edges, and a
regular geometric shape. The fundamental units-atoms, ions or molecules are
assembled in a regular, repeating manner extending in three dimensions throughout the
crystal. An essential feature of a crystal is that its entire structure can be figured from
a tiny portion of it. Some solids, like glass, lack this long-range order and are said to
be amorphous. The structural units of an amorphous solid, whether they are atoms,
molecules or ions occur at random positions. As in liquids, there is no ordered pattern
to the arrangement of an amorphous solid.
A structural unit of a crystalline solid has a characteristic repetitive pattern. The crystal
types and their basic units are (i) ionic (electrostatic attraction of ions), (ii) Molecular
(electrostatic attraction of dipoles in molecules) (a) Polar (dipole-dipole and Hbonding) and (b) Non-polar (London forces) (iii) Network (covalently bonded
atoms); and (iv) metallic (positive nuclei in electron sea).
There are four important classes of crystalline solids.
Ionic Crystals
The fundamental units of an ionic solids are positive and negative ions. As a result, the
inter-particle forces (ionic bonds) are much stronger than the van der Waals forces in
molecular solids. To maximize attractions, cations are surrounded by as many anions
as possible, and vice versa.
The properties of ionic solids are direct consequences of the strong inter-ionic forces,
which create a high lattice energy. Crystalline ionic solids are usually, brittle, and non-
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
186
conductors of electricity, although molten crystals may be good conductors. They
usually have high melting points. Some of the more familiar ionic solids are table salt
(NaCl), saltpeter (KNO3), washing soda (Na2CO3.10H2O), and black board chalk
(CaCO3).
Group Assignment
With the help of balls and sticks of any material or any other modelling material build the
model of crystal sodium chloride. [Hint-Take help of Figure 3.25 ]
Na+
Cl–
Na with Cl neighbors + –
Sodium chloride crystal
Cl with Na neighbors – +
Figure: 3. 25 Crystal model of sodium chloride.
Molecular Crystals
Various combinations of dipole-dipole, dispersion and hydrogen-bonding forces are
operative in molecular solids, which accounts for their wide range of physical
properties. Dispersion forces are the principal forces acting in non-polar substances,
so melting points generally increase with molar mass. Among polar molecules, dipoledipole forces and where ever possible, hydrogen-bonding dominate. Nevertheless,
intermolecular forces are still relatively weak, so the melting points are much lower
than ionic, metallic and network covalent solids.
The fundamental unit of a molecular solid is the molecule. Such solids are common
among organic compounds and simple inorganic compounds. Molecular crystals are
usually transparent, brittle, and break easily when stressed. They are usually non
conductors of heat and electricity and usually have low melting points. Familiar
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
187
molecular crystalline solids include sugar, dry ice (solid carbon dioxide), glucose and
aspirin.
Covalent Network Crystals
In this type of crystalline solids, separate particles are not present. Instead, strong
covalent bonds link the atoms together throughout the network of covalent solid. As a
consequence of the strong bonding, all these substances have extremely high melting
and boiling points, but their conductivity and hardness depend on the nature of their
bonding. The two common crystalline forms of elemental carbon are examples of
network covalent solids. Although graphite and diamond have the same composition,
their properties are strikingly different, graphite occurs as stacked flat sheets of
hexagonal carbon rings with a strong sigma-bond framework and delocalized pielectrons over the entire sheet. These mobile electrons allow graphite to conduct
electricity. Common impurities, such as O2 makes graphite soft. In diamond, each
carbon atom is bonded to four other carbon atoms tetrahedrally in a giant structure.
The carbons are joined by single bonds. Strong single bonds throughout the crystal
make diamond among the hardest substance known. Because of its localized bonding
electrons, diamond (like most network covalent solids) is unable to conduct electricity.
The most important network covalent solids are the silicates. In a covalent network
solid, the whole crystal is one giant molecule. The fundamental units are atoms
covalently bonded to their neighbours. These crystals are usually hard, non conductors
of heat and electricity, and have high melting points. Examples of covalent network
solids include quartz (SiO2) and diamond.
Metallic Crystals
The strong metallic bonding forces hold individual atoms together in metallic solids.
The properties of metals, such as high electrical and thermal conductivity, luster and
malleability result from the presence of delocalized electrons, the essential feature of
metallic bonding (introduced in Section 3.4). Metals have a wide range of melting
points and hardness, which are related to the packing efficiency of the crystal structure
and the number of valence electrons available for bonding. For example, Group IIA
metals are harder and higher melting than Group IA metals, because the IIA metals
have closer packed structures and twice as many delocalized valence electrons.The
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
188
fundamental units of pure metallic solids are identical metal atoms. Metallic crystals are
opaque with reflective surfaces. They are ductile and malleable, good conductor of
heat and electricity, and they usually have high melting points. Copper, silver, gold,
iron and aluminium are familiar examples of metals.
Figure 3.26 Model of metallic crystal.
Table 3.2 Comparison of the four types of crystals
Type of Solid Interaction Properties Examples
Ionic Ionic High melting point, NaCl, MgO
brittle, hard
Molecular Hydrogen bonding, Low melting point, H2, CO2
Dipole-Dipole, non-conducting
London dispersion
Network Covalent bonding High melting point, C (diamond),
hard, non-conducting SiO2 (quartz)
Metallic Metallic bonding Variable hardness and Fe, Mg
melting point (depending
upon strength of metallic
bonding), conducting
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
189
Exercise 3.18
Match the substances from list A with the best suited characteristics given in list B
and justify your answer.
List A List B
Substances Characteristics
a Fe a Forces of attractions are between
positive ions and 'sea of electrons'
b I2 b High boiling point due to strong
covalent bonds
c H2O c High boiling point due to hydrogen
bond
d SiO2 d Weak van der Waal's forces
e Na e Giant metallic lattice, ions packed
together very closely leading to high
density
f Non-polar solvent
Unit Summary
• Lewis symbols of representative elements are related to their location in
the periodic table. The lattice energy and enthalpy of formation of an
ionic compound, together with other atomic and molecular properties,
can be related in a thermochemcial cycle called Born-Haber cycle.
• A covalent bond is created by the sharing of an electron-pair between
atoms.
• In a Lewis structure representing covalent bonds, electron-pairs are
either bonding-pairs or lone-pairs.
• In a covalent bond between atoms of different electronegativity,
electrons are displaced toward the atom with the higher
electronegativity. In terms of electronegativity differences chemical bonds
vary over the range: non polar to polar covalent to ionic.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 11
190
• In some cases of covalent bonding, one atom appears to provide both
electrons in the bonding pair; the bond is known as coordinate-covalent
bond.
• Bonded atoms may share more than one pair of electrons between them,
giving rise to multiple covalent bonding.
• In the phenomenon of resonance, two or more Lewis structures have the
same skeletal structure but different bonding arrangements. The best
description of the resonance structure (resonance hybrid) is obtained by
combining plausible structures (contributing structures).
• Exceptions to the octet rule are found in odd-electron molecules and
molecular fragments called free radicals. A few structures appear to
have too few electrons to complete all the octets. Some structures
appear to have too many. In the latter case, a central atom may employ
an "expanded" octet with five or six electron-pairs.
• Valance shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPR) predicts the
geometrical structures of molecules and polyatomic ions based on
mutual repulsions among valance shell electron groups.
• Multiple bonds, whether they consist of four electrons (double bond) or
six electrons (triple bond), are treated as one electron set.
• The separation of the centres of positive and negative charge in a polar
covalent bond creates a bond moment. Whether a molecule as a whole is
polar, that is, whether there is a resultant dipole moment, is established
by bond moments and molecular geometry.
• A symmetrical distribution of identical bond moments about a central
atom results in a cancellation of all bond moments, with the result that
the molecule is nonpolar, as in the case of CCl4..
• In the valence bond method (VB) a covalent bond is viewed as the
overlap of atomic orbitals of the bonded atoms in a region between the
atomic nuclei.
• Molecular geometry is determined by the spatial orientations of the
atomic orbitals involved in bonding.
• The VB method often requires that bonding atomic orbitals be hybridized
in order to rationalize known structures of molecules. A hybridized
orbital is some combination of s, p and d orbitals, such as sp, sp2, sp3,
CHEMICAL BONDING AND STRUCTURE
191
Check list
sp3d and sp3d2. The geometric distribution of hybridized orbitals in the
valence bond method is the same as the electron set geometry proposed
by VSEPR theory.
• Hybrid orbitals overlap in the usual way (end-to-end) and form σ bonds.
Unhybridized p orbitals overlap in a side-by-side manner and give rise to
π bonds. A double bond consists of one σ bond and one σ bond; a triple
bond, one σ bond and two π bonds.
• Acceptable solutions to wave equations written for the electrons in a
molecule are called molecular orbitals (MO). The two main types of MOs
are bonding molecular obitals, which concentrate electron charge density
between atoms or just above and below the imaginary line joining the
two nuclei and antibonding molecular orbitals, which concentrate
electron charge densities away from the intermolecular bonding region.
• Electrons can be assigned to molecular orbitals by the scheme similar to
the aufbau process. MO theory provides more satisfactory descriptions
for certain structures than does the VB method, for example, some odd -
electrons species and the O2 molecule