Most of the materials around us are mixtures. In this unit, we shall be concerned with
properties and types of mixtures, and with the relationships of their properties to those of
the individual components.
A homogeneous mixture, also known as solution, is a mixture that is uniform in its
properties throughout a given sample. When sodium chloride is dissolved in water, you
obtain a homogeneous mixture, or solution. Air is a gaseous solution, principally of two
elementary substances, nitrogen and oxygen, which are physically mixed but not chemically
combined.
There are various practical reasons for preparing solutions. For instance, most chemical
reactions are run in solution. Solutions have specific useful properties. For example, when
gold is used for making jewellery, it is mixed, or alloyed with a small amount of silver.
Gold-silver alloys are not only harder than pure gold, but they also melt at lower temperatures
and are therefore easier to cast.
In this unit, you will study the dependence of solubility (the amount of substance that
dissolves in another) on temperature and (in some cases) on pressure; the ways of
expressing the concentration of a solution. You will also study about the colligative properties
of solutions.
1.1 HOMOGENEOUS AND HETEROGENEOUS MIXTURES
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• define the terms mixture, homogeneous and heterogeneous mixture, solute, solvent,
solution;
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
3
• distinguish between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures;
• describe suspensions and colloids.
1.1.1 Some Basic Definitions
How do you distinguish homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures?
Mixtures are combinations of two or more substances in which each substance retains its
own chemical identity and hence its own properties. A sample of clean air, for example,
consists of many elements and compounds physically mixed together, including oxygen
(O2), nitrogen (N2), carbon dioxide (CO2), noble gases, and water vapour (H2O). Can
you give more examples of mixtures? There are two broad classes of mixtures,
homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures.
A homogeneous mixture is a mixture in which the composition of the mixture is the same
throughout. i.e., it has no visible boundaries because the components are mixed as individual
atoms, ions and molecules. For example, when a spoonful of sugar dissolves in water you
obtain a homogeneous mixture.
A heterogeneous mixture has one or more visible boundaries between the components.
Thus, its composition is not uniform. In this type of mixture, each component’s particles
can be detected by the naked eye or with a magnifying glass. If sand is mixed with iron
filings, the sand grains and the iron filings remain separate. This is an example of a
heterogeneous mixture.
A typical solution consists of at least two substances; a substance in smaller amount called
the solute, dissolved in a larger amount of another substance, known as the solvent. The
solvent is often but not always present in excess. For example, the physical state of a
solution containing 40 g of table sugar and 30 g of water is liquid. In this case, though water
is present in small amount, it is present as solvent.
 Experiment 1.1
Distinction between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures
Objective: To distinguish between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures.
Apparatus:Beakers, test tubes, watch glass, stirrer.
Chemicals:Table salt, water, iron filings, sulphur powder, oil, alcohol.
Procedure:
Prepare mixtures of the following pairs in suitable apparatus.
a Table salt and water
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
4
b Iron filings and sulphur powder
c Oil and water
d Water and alcohol
Use either naked eye or hand lens to observe each mixture. Classify the mixtures you
prepared as homogeneous and heterogeneous. Give reason for your classification.
1.1.2 Suspension and Colloids
 Experiment 1.2
Investigating properties of some mixtures
Objective:To see the difference between suspensions, solutions and colloids.
Apparatus:Three 100 mL beakers.
Chemicals: Sand, gentian violet and bile.
Procedure:
1. Label the beakers as A, B, and C; add sand to beaker A, gentian violet to beaker
B, and bile to beaker C.
2. Add about 50 mL water to each beaker and stir the contents.
3. Leave the beakers undisturbed for about 30 minutes and see if they become clear
on standing.
4. Pass a beam of light through each beaker.
Observations and analysis:
a In which beaker the contents separate in two layers on standing?
b Which beaker scatters light without separating the contents on standing?
c Which beaker contains a solution and which beaker contains a colloid?
d What do you conclude from this experiment?
Exercise 1.1
Define each of the following terms and give examples for each.
a homogeneous mixture c solute e colloid
b heterogeneous mixture d solvent f suspension
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
5
What is the difference between suspensions and solutions?
We are all familiar with suspensions such as a mixture of mud and water or flour and water.
Sometimes we prepare and use a suspension of paint in water. These suspensions are
heterogeneous mixtures composed of particles that are visible to the naked eye or that
can be seen with a magnifying glass. The suspended particles appear cloudy, and settle
down in due course of time. When Mg(OH)2
 (called milk of magnesia) is shaken with
water, it forms a suspension. In contrast, when we make a solution, we prepare a
homogeneous mixture in which the dissolved species are molecules or ions. A solution may
be coloured, but it is transparent; the dissolved molecules or ions are invisible, and they do
not settle out on standing. Figure 1.1a and Figure 1.1b show a solution and a suspension,
respectively.
Figure 1.1 a) Solution b) Suspension
There is another group, called colloids that exhibit properties intermediate between those
of suspensions and solutions. The particles in a colloid are larger than most simple molecules.
However, colloidal particles are small enough and do not settle down. Although colloid
particles may be so small that the dispersion appears uniform, even under a microscope,
they are large enough to scatter light very effectively (see Figure 1.2). Consequently, most
colloids appear cloudy or opaque unless they are very dilute. Like solutions, colloids can
be gaseous, liquid or solid. Clouds are colloidal mixtures composed of air and water
droplets that are small enough that they do not settle out.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
6
Figure 1.2 The light beam is not visible as it passes through a true solution (left), but it
is clearly visible as it passes through colloidal mixture (right).
1.2 TYPES OF SOLUTIONS
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• explain different types of solutions;
• give examples for each type of solution;
• after a visit to nearby gold smith, present a report to class on how jewellery gold is
made.
Solutions may exist in any of the three states of matter.
Activity 1.1
Form groups and discuss the following points. Report the result of your discussion in
tabular form.
1. Mention the types of solutions.
2. What are the possible physical states of solutes and solvents in each type of solution?
3. Give at least one example to each type of solution.
4. Explain briefly how solid solutions are formed?
5. Copy the given table in your note book and write your answers in it:
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
7
State of solute State of solvent State of solution Type of solution Examples
PROJECT
Do you know how jewellery gold is made?
Your teacher will arrange a visit to the nearby goldsmith. Ask the following questions
during your visit to the goldsmith:
How is jewellery made from gold? What are the possible components, other than
gold present in the jewellery? Which component is present in large quantity? What
is the advantage of mixing gold with other materials? Can you separate the
components present in the jewellery? How is purity of gold assessed and what is
the unit of measuring the purity? Write a report about what you have observed
during your visit and present it to the class.
Exercise 1.2
1. Give two examples of
a gas-gas solution d solid-liquid solution
b gas-liquid solution e solid-solid solution
c liquid-liquid solution
2. What are the possible physical states of solutes and solvents in
a gaseous solutions? c solid solutions?
b liquid solutions?
1.3 THE SOLUTION PROCESS
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• explain how the “like dissolves like” rule depends on inter-particle forces of
interactions and predict relative solubility;
• define rate of dissolution;
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
8
• define heat of solution, solvation energy and hydration energy;
• apply the concept of heat of solution to a solution of ammonium nitrate and sodium
hydroxide crystals;
• explain how heat of solution is influenced by the inter-particle interaction forces.
Activity 1.2
Try to mix the following substances with water.
a oil b benzene c ethanol
What did you observe? Which of the substances is completely miscible with water and
which of them is immiscible? Discuss your observations with your classmates, and report
your possible reasons to the class.
1.3.1 Liquid Solutions and Interparticle Forces of
Attractions
What are the major factors that affect the solubility of substances in liquid solvents?
When a solute dissolves in a solvent, particles of the solute disperse throughout the solvent.
The solute particles occupy positions that are normally taken by solvent molecules i.e.,
particles of the solute mix with particles of the solvent. The tendency to mix is affected by
the relative strengths of three types of interaction. These are
* Solvent-solvent interaction
* Solute-solute interaction
* Solvent-solute interaction
Strong forces of attraction between solute particles (solute-solute interactions) or between
solvent particles (solvent-solvent interactions) tend to keep like particles close together
and reduce the solubility of solute in the solvent. On the other hand, strong attraction
forces between solute and solvent particles (solute-solvent interactions) makes dissolving
easier and helps to keep particles in solution. For simplicity, we can imagine the solution
process taking place in three distinct steps (Figure 1.3).
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
9
Solution
Expanded solute
Solute
Step 2
Step 3
Solvent
Expanded solvent
Step 1
Step 3
Figure 1.3 A molecular view of the solution process, portrayed as taking place
in three steps.
Step 1 – is the separation of solvent molecules from each other to “make room” for the
incoming solute particles and step 2 – is the separation of solute molecules. These two
steps require energy input to break attractive intermolecular forces. Therefore, they are
endothermic. In step 3 – the solvent and solute molecules mix. This process can be
exothermic or endothermic.
Solution of liquids in liquids
Ethanol mixes with water but oil does not. Why? Solubility is a measure of how much
solute will dissolve in a solvent at a specific temperature. Do you know the principle “like
dissolves like”? The “like dissolves like” principle is helpful in predicting the solubility of a
substance in a given solvent. What this expression means is that two substances with
intermolecular forces of similar type and magnitude are likely to be soluble in each other.
For example, in a solution formed between benzene (C6H6) and carbon tetrachloride
(CCl4), both species are non-polar and experience only relatively weak London forces.
When these two liquids are mixed, they readily dissolve in each other because the attraction
between CCl4 and C6H6 molecules is comparable in magnitude to the forces between
CCl4 molecules and between C6H6 molecules. Two liquids are said to be miscible if they
are completely soluble in each other in all proportions. What can you say about the
solubility of C6H6 and CCl4?
Water is the most prominent solvent because it is so common and dissolves so many ionic
and polar substances. Water molecules are strongly associated with each other through
hydrogen bonding. Compounds that form hydrogen bonding tend to be soluble in water.
For example, alcohols such as methanol, ethanol and 1, 2-ethylene glycol are miscible in
water because they can form hydrogen bonding with water molecules.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
10
H —C O—H O —C —
H H
H H

– 
+ H

+

–
H

+
Hydrogen bonding between
ethanol and water
H C O—H O — —
H
H

– 
+ H

+

–
H

+
Hydrogen bonding between
methanol and water
Figure 1.4 Solubility of ethanol and methanol in water through hydrogen bonding.
What happens if octane, a typical hydrocarbon, is added to water? Water molecules
are held in contact by hydrogen bonding, while octane molecules are held in contact by
London or dispersion forces. When the two liquids are mixed, the attraction between the
octane molecules and the water molecules is not strong enough to overcome the hydrogen
bonding between the water molecules. The relatively strong hydrogen bonding keep the
water molecules clustered together, and no mixing occurs.
Solutions of Solids in Liquids
Activity 1.3
Take two containers and add water to both. Put table salt in the first container and table
sugar in the second container and stir. What did you observe? Did both solids dissolve in
water? Repeat the same procedure using oil instead of water.
What did you observe? Did both solids dissolve in oil? Discuss your observations with your
classmates. Can you make generalization from your observation?
Solids composed of polar molecules or ions, are insoluble in non-polar solvents. The
weak solute-solvent interaction, compared with the strong attractions within the crystal, is
not sufficient to tear apart the lattice. This is why sugar, which consists of molecules lightly
bound to each other by hydrogen bonding, is insoluble in solvents like oil. However, sugar
is soluble in water, because this solvent attracts sugar molecules in the same way that sugar
molecules attract each other.
Solids whose crystals are held together by London forces are able to dissolve to
appreciable extents in non-polar solvents. However, they are not soluble to any great
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
11
degree in polar solvents, for the same reason that non-polar liquids are insoluble in polar
solvents.
Can you give an example of a solid non-polar compound that dissolves in benzene
but not in water? Water and other polar molecules are attracted to ions. The electrostatic
attraction between an ion and a molecule with a dipole is called an ion-dipole attraction.
These attractions play an important role in the dissolution of ionic compounds in water
(Figure 1.5).
+
O
H
H
–
O H
H +
+
Figure 1.5 Ion-dipole force in dissolving an ionic crystal.
What happens when ionic compounds dissolve in water?
When ionic compounds, such as KCl, dissolve in water, (Figure 1.6), the ions in the solid
separate because water molecules surround and solvate the ions. When potassium chloride
is added to water, the ion-dipole forces attract the positive (hydrogen) end of the polar
water molecules to the negative chloride ion at the surface of the solid, and they attract the
negative (oxygen) end to the positive potassium ions. The water molecules penetrate
between individual K+ and Cl– ions and surround them, reducing the strong inter-ionic
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
12
forces that bind the ions together. This reduction allows them to move off into solution as
hydrated ions. In general, when a solute particle becomes surrounded by solvent molecules,
we say that it is solvated. When the solvent is water the process is called hydration.
K+
O
H H
O
H
H O
H
H
O
H H
O
H
O H
H
H
Cl–
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H H
O H H
O
Figure 1.6 K+ and Cl–
 surrounded by H2
O molecules.
In Grade 11 Chemistry, you learned about the cleansing action of soap, which work on the
principle of “like dissolves like”. Non-polar tails of soap dissolve in oil and grease globules.
The polar heads keep the particle suspended in water in which they can be washed away.
1.3.2 The Rate of Dissolution
What are the major factors that affect the rate of dissolution?
The rate of dissolution is the speed with which a solute goes into solution. This largely
depends upon the inter-particle forces and, to a lesser extent, on conditions such as the
surface area of the solid solute, and the temperature and the pressure of the system.
Inter-particle force is the extent to which solvent molecules interact with particles of the
solute. When the solvent-solute interactions are stronger than those between solute-solute
and solvent-solvent particles, the dissolution process becomes easier.
Increasing surface area will increase the rate of dissolution because it increases the number
of solute particles in contact with the solvent.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
13
 Experiment 1.3
1.3.3 Energy Changes in the Solution Process
Heat of Solution
Investigation of Heat of Solution
Objective: To investigate the heat of solution of sodium hydroxide and ammonium nitrate.
Apparatus: Erlenmeyer flask, thermometer, cork.
Chemicals: Sodium hydroxide, ammonium nitrate and water.
Procedure:
1. Pour 50 ml of water into Erlenmeyer flask and place a thermometer as shown in
Figure 1.7.
Figure 1.7 Apparatus to measure the heat of solution of sodium hydroxide.
2. Record the initial temperature of the water.
3. Remove the cork, along with the thermometer, and add 4 g of sodium hydroxide
pellets.
4. Replace the cork gently, stir the contents, and note the highest temperature reading.
5. Determine the heat of the solution of sodium hydroxide.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
14
6. Repeat the experiment, using 4 g of ammonium nitrate.
7. Copy and complete the following table.
Chemical Initial temperature Maximum temperature Heat of
of the solvent of the solution solution
NaOH
NH4NO3
8. Write down your conclusion.
9. Present your findings.
What are the three major interactions that are observed in the solution process?
You have learned that the solution process has three steps. The amount of energy that is
absorbed or released when one mole of a substance enters solution is called the heat of
solution and is given the symbol DH°Sol, which is the sum of the enthalpies associated with
the three steps in the solution process (Figure 1.3).
* The separation of solute particles is endothermic because energy is required to
overcome the forces holding the solute particles together. For gases, this step is
ignored because their molecules are already widely separated.
* The separation of solvent particles is also endothermic because energy is required
to overcome the forces holding the solvent molecules together.
* Each solute particle is surrounded by a layer or “cage” of solvent molecules that is
attracted to it by intermolecular forces. This step can be endothermic or exothermic,
and is referred to as solvation.
The heat of solution DHo
Sol
DHo
Sol = DH1
° + DH2
° + DH3
° = DH°
Hydration + DH°Latice energy
where DH1
° and DH2
° are enthalpies required to separate solute particles and solvent
molecules, respectively, and DH3
°is the enthalpy of solvation. If the solute-solvent attraction
is stronger than both the solvent-solvent attraction and the solute-solute attraction, the
solution process is favourable, or exothermic (DHo
Sol < 0). If the solute-solvent interaction
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
15
is weaker than the solvent-solvent and solute-solute interactions, then the solution process
is endothermic (DHo
Sol > 0).
Hydration of Ionic Solids in Water
What is lattice energy? How can it affect the solubility of ionic solids?
Hydration of ions favours the dissolution of an ionic solid in water. The ions in an ionic
crystal are very strongly attracted to one another. Therefore, the solubility of an ionic solid
depends not only on the energy of the hydration of ions, but also on lattice energy, which
are the energy holding ions together in the crystal lattice. Lattice energy works against the
solution process, so an ionic solid with relatively large lattice energy is usually insoluble.
Lattice energies depend on the charge on the ions and also the distance between the
centres of the neighbouring positive and negative ions. As the magnitude of the charge on
the ions increases the lattice energy also increases. For this reason, you can expect
substances with single charged ions to be more comparatively soluble, and those with
multiple charged ions to be less soluble in water.
Activity 1.4
Take 1 g of KNO3
, NH4
Cl, and Na2
CO3
 each and dissolve them in water in different test
tubes. What did you observe? Which of these chemicals dissolves faster? Is there any
change in temperature before and after mixing? Which solution becomes hot and which
becomes cold, when solute and solvents are mixed? Discuss your observations with your
classmates.
Activity 1.5
Discuss the following questions and write a report. Present your report to the class.
1. How do you compare the hydration of the ions of Group I metals with that of Group II
metals? Give reasons.
2. Compare the solubility of Mg(OH)2
 with Ba(OH)2
, MgSO4
 with BaSO4
. Justify your
answers in terms of lattice energy and hydration energy.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
16
Exercise 1.3
1. Define each of the following.
a rate of dissolution d hydration energy
b heat of solution e lattice energy
c solvation f ideal solution
2. Indicate the type of solute-solvent interaction that should be most important in
each of the following solutions:
a KBr in water c NaOH in water
b Toluene, C7H8, in cyclohexane, C6H12
3. Sodium carbonate is soluble in water, while calcium carbonate is insoluble. Why?
1.4 SOLUBILITY AS AN EQUILIBRIUM PROCESS
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• describe the distinctions among unsaturated, saturated and supersaturated solutions;
• prepare a supersaturated solution of sodium phosphate;
• explain the equilibrium nature of a saturated solutions;
• define solubility and describe the factors that affect the solubility of substances;
• investigate the effect of temperature on the solubility of sodium sulphate in water;
• conduct an experiment to determine the solubility of table salt and sugar in water;
• state Henry’s law;
• use Henry’s law to calculate the concentration of gaseous solute in a solution.
Activity 1.6
Form a group and perform the following activity.
1. Pour 50 mL water in a beaker.
2. Add some crystal of Na2
SO4
 into the water using spatula and stir until it dissolves.
a What do you call this type of solution?
3. Continue adding more and more Na2
SO4
 stirring to dissolve.
b What do you observe after addition of large amount of solute?
4. Filter the undissolved solute. Collect the filtrate or the solution.
c Why does the solute remains undissolved?
d What is the name of such a solution?
5. Add some more solute to the filtrate and stir.
e Does the additional solute dissolve?
Discuss your findings with rest of the class.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
17
 Experiment 1.4
Investigating the solubility of NaCl
Objective: To determine the solubility of sodium chloride in water.
Apparatus: Beaker, evaporating dish, measuring cylinder, glass rod, filter paper,
analytical balance, and Bunsen burner.
Chemicals: Sodium chloride and water.
 Figure 1.8 Experimental set-up for the determination of the solubility.
Procedure:
1. Take an evaporating dish and weigh it.
2. Take 100 mL of water in a beaker and add sodium chloride to it. Stirr the solution
vigorously with a glass rod, until undissolved sodium chloride is left in the beaker.
3. Take 50 mL of the supernatant saturated solution (assume that 50 mL of solution is
equal to 50 mL of the solvent) and transfer it to an evaporating dish.
4. Heat the solution in the evaporating dish as shown in the Figure 1.8, till all the
water has evaporated and dry sodium chloride is left in the evaporating dish.
5. Cool the evaporating dish containing dry sodium chloride to room temperature
and weigh it again.
Observations and analysis:
1. Volume of the NaCl solution ……………………..
2. Weight of the empty evaporating dish ……………………..
3. Weight of the evaporating dish + NaCl collected after evaporating the solvent ....
4. Calculate the solubility of NaCl in water and express the results in grams of NaCl/
100 g of water.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
18
When an ionic solid dissolves, ions leave the solid and become dispersed in the solvent.
Occasionally some dissolved ions collide with the undissolved solute and crystallize. As
long as the rate of dissolution is greater than the rate of crystallization, the concentration of
ions in the solution rises. Eventually, ions from the solid are dissolved at the same rate as
the ions in the solution are crystallized. At this point, even though dissolution and crystallization
continue, there is no further change in the concentration over time. The system has reached
equilibrium. That is, excess undissolved solute is in equilibrium with the dissolved solute.
Solid (solute) 
Dissolution
Crystallization
← →Dissolved ions
After equilibrium is established, no more solid dissolves. Why? Such a solution is said to
be saturated. A saturated solution is a solution in which the dissolved and undissolved
solutes are in dynamic equilibrium see Figure 1.9.
Figure 1.9 Formation of a saturated solution.
a A coloured solid solute is added to water.
b After a few minutes, the solution is coloured, due to the dissolved solute, and there
is less undissolved solute than in (a).
c After more time passes, the solution’s colour has intensified and there is less
undissolved solute. Therefore, the solution in (b) must have been unsaturated.
d Still later, the solution colour and the quantity of undissolved solute appear to be the
same as that in (c). Dynamic equilibrium must have been attained in (c) and persists
in (d). The solution is saturated.
Before equilibrium is reached, the solution is said to be unsaturated. An unsaturated solution
is a solution that can dissolve more solute at a given temperature.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
19
Activity 1.7
Prepare a saturated solution of sodium thiosulphate (Na2
S2
O3
) in beaker containing 50 mL
water. Heat the solution so that extra amount of solute dissolves.
Filter and divide the solution into two parts in two different beakers. Keep both the
solutions to cool slowly undisturbed. After cooling stir one of the solutions and observe
what happens.
Drop a small grain of crystal in the second one and observe the result.
a What is the name of such a solution that is made by cooling concentrated solution?
b What happens when the solution was stirred?
c What about the solution to which a crystal grain is dropped? Why?
d What did you understand from the activity?
The solubility of many ionic solids in water increases as temperature increases. They form
supersaturated solutions, which actually contain larger amounts of solute than in saturated
solutions. Supersaturated solutions can sometimes be prepared by saturating a solution at
a high temperature. Honey is an example of naturally occurring supersaturated solution. It
contains glucose, as a solute, and water, as a solvent. If honey is left to stand, the glucose
eventually crystallizes.
Supersaturated solutions are unstable, and addition of a “seed” crystal of solute will generally
cause all of the excess solute to suddenly crystallize see Figure 1.10.
ABC
A Hot supersaturated solution before seeding.
B Cold and undisturbed supersaturated solution without seeding.
C Cold supersaturated solution after seeding.
Figure 1.10 Seeding a supersaturated solution.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
20
1.4.1 Effect of Temperature on Solubility of Solute
Activity 1.8
1. Prepare a saturated solution of Na2
SO4
 at room temperature.
2. Heat the solution on a tripod with wire gauze and add some crystal of Na2
SO4
.
3. What happens to the solute?
4. If the solute dissolves add more and continue heating.
5. What is the effect of temperature on solubility of this solute?
6. After all the additional solute dissolves remove the beaker from the tripod and add
cold water on the side of the beaker.
7. What do you observe?
8. What is the effect of cooling the solution?
9. Why do we always mention temperature when we report solubility of substances?
Temperature affects the solubility of most substances. When a solid dissolves in a liquid, the
solute particles must separate, so energy must be added. Thus, for a solid, DH°
Solute > 0.
In contrast, gas particles are already separated, so DH°
Solute ª 0. Because the hydration
step is exothermic (DH°
Hydra < 0), the sum of these two terms must be negative. Thus, for
all gases in water, DH°
Sol < 0.
Solute(g) + Water(l) Æ Saturated solution(aq) + Heat
This equation means that solubility of gases in water decreases with rising temperature. In
most (but certainly not all) cases, the solubility of a solid substance increases with increase
in temperature. The magnitude of the increase in solubility varies from one substance to
another. The solubility of sodium chloride in water increases by only about 10% from 35.7
g/100 g to 39.8 g/100 g, when the temperature is raised from 0 °C to 100 °C. The solubility
of silver nitrate, however, increases by over 700% from 122 g /100 g to 951 g/100 g, over
the same temperature range.
A few solids such as sodium sulphate have unusual solubility characteristics in water. The
solubility of sodium sulphate rises between 0 °C to 32.4 °C, where it reaches a maximum
of 49.7 g Na2SO4 per 100 g water. Further, the solubility of sodium sulphate, decreases
by about 19.23%, changing from 49.7 g/100 g at 32.4 °C, to 42 g/100 g at 100 °C. Thus
some ionic compounds show mixed solubility behaviour. Figure 1.11 shows the solubility
of some ionic compounds in water, as a function of temperature.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
21
NaNO3
CaCl2
Pb(NO )3 2
NaCl
KNO3 KCl
K Cr O 2 27
KClO3
Ce (SO ) 2 43
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Temperature (°C)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Solubility (g of solute/100 g water)
Na SO 2 4
Figure 1.11 Approximate variation of solubility with temperature for some ionic
salts in water.
1.4.2 The Effect of Pressure on Solubility
Why pressure significantly affect only the solubility of gases? Since liquids and solids
are almost incompressible, pressure has little effect on their solubility, but it has a major
effect on gas solubility. The solubility of gases always increases with increasing pressure.
The effect of increased pressure on solubility has long been used in the beverage industry,
where carbonated beverages such as champagne, beer and many soft drinks are bottled
under CO2 pressure, up to 4 Pa.
The solubility of a gas in a liquid is directly proportional to the partial pressure of the gas
over the solution.
The quantitative relationship between gas solubility and pressure is given by Henry’s law,
which states that
“at a given temperature the solubility of a gas in a liquid is directly proportional to the
partial pressure of the gas over the solution”.
Cg 
= kH P
g
where C
g is the molar concentration (mol/L) of the dissolved gas, P
g
 is the pressure (in
atm) of the gas over the solution and kH is Henry’s law constant, which is expressed in
mol/L atm.
Consider the piston-cylinder assembly in Figure 1.12, in which gas is above a saturated
aqueous solution of the same gas. At a given pressure, P1, the same number of gas molecules
enters and leave the solution per unit time. i.e., the system is at equilibrium.
Gas + Solvent Æ Saturated solution
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
22
If you push down the piston (increasing pressure to P2), the gas volume decreases and
gas particles collide with the liquid surface more often. Thus, more gas particles enter the
solution per unit time. Higher gas pressure disturbs the balance of equilibrium, so more gas
dissolves to reduce this disturbance until the equilibrium is established in the system.
 a) A saturated solution of a gas is in equilibrium at pressure P1
b) If the pressure is increased to P2
, the volume of the gas decreases. As a result,
the collisions with the surface increases, and more gas molecules enter the
solution when equilibrium is re–established.
Figure 1.12 The effect of pressure on gas solubility:
Table 1.1 Henry’s Law constants for some gases in water at 20°C.
Gas kH (mol/L. atm)
Air 7.9 × 10–4
Argon 1.5 × 10–3
Carbon dioxide 3.3 × 10–2
Helium 3.7 × 10–4
Neon 5.0 × 10–4
Hydrogen 8.5 × 10–4
Nitrogen 7.0 × 10–4
Oxygen 1.23 × 10–3
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
23
Example 1.1
The partial pressure of carbon dioxide gas inside a bottle of mineral water is 4 atm
at 25°C. What is the solubility of CO2?
Solution:
Given: Required:
PCO2
 = 4 atm CCO2
 = ?
kH = 3.3 × 10–2 mol/L atm
 CCO2
= kH · PCO2
= 3.3 × 10–2 mol/L. atm × 4 atm
= 0.1 mol/L
 CCO2
= 0.1 mol/L
Exercise 1.4
1. If air contains 78% N2 by volume, what is the solubility of nitrogen in water at
25°C?
2. Calculate the concentration of CO2 in a soft drink after the bottle is opened at
25 °C under a CO2 partial pressure of 3.0 × 10–4 atm.
1.5 WAYS OF EXPRESSING CONCENTRATIONS OF
SOLUTION
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• define terms like solution, concentration, mass percentages, ppm and ppb of a solute
in a solution;
• calculate the mass percentage, ppm and ppb of a solute in a solution from given set
of information;
• define mole fraction, molarity, equivalent mass, number of equivalents, normality
and molality;
• calculate mole fraction, molarity, normality and molality of a solution from given set
of information; and
• interconvert various concentration expressions.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
24
What does concentration mean? How do you determine it?
The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute present in a given quantity of solvent
or solution. The concentration of a solution can be expressed either qualitatively or
quantitatively. The terms dilute and concentrated are used to describe a solution qualitatively.
A solution with a relatively small amount of solute is said to be dilute. One with a large
amount of the solutes is said to be concentrated.
The knowledge of concentration can be very useful in everyday life. For example, human
beings estimate the quantity of solutes such as sugar and salt, in beverages and other food
solutions by tasting. However, sometimes tasting a substance is not safe and, in general,
this is not an accurate method of estimating the concentration of solute in a solution. Why?
Several quantitative expressions of concentration are used in chemistry. Here you are
going to learn mass percentage, ppm and ppb, mole fraction, molarity, normality and molality
of a solution.
1.5.1 Mass Percentage, ppm and ppb of Solute
What does mass percent mean? How do you convert it to ppm and ppb?
Percent by mass: The percent by mass, also called percent by weight or weight percent,
is the ratio of the mass of a solute to the mass of the solution, multiplied by 100.
Percent by mass of solute = 
Mass of solute
Mass of solute + Mass of solvent × 100
or
Percent by mass of solute = 
Mass of solute
Mass of solution × 100
The percent by mass has no unit because it is the ratio of two similar quantities.
Example 1.2
A solution is made by dissolving 13.5 g of glucose, C6H12O6, in 0.100 kg of
water. What is the mass percentage of solute in this solution?
Solution:
Given: Required:
Mass of solute = 13.5 g % by mass of solute?
Mass of solvent = 0.100 kg = 100 g
 % by mass of glucose = Mass of glucose
Mass of solution × 100
= 
13.5 g
13.5 g +100 g × 100 = 11.9%
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
25
Parts per million (ppm): When the mass of solute in the solution is very small, a widely
used expression is parts per million (ppm).
ppm of component = 
Mass of solute
Massof solution × 106
or
ppm = Mass percentage of solute × 104
Example 1.3
A 2.5 g sample of ground water was found to contain 5.4 µg of Zn2+. What is the
concentration of Zn2+, in parts per million?
Solution:
Because 1 µg is 1 × 10–6 g, 5.4 µg = 5.4 ×10–6 g
Thus, ppm = Mass of solute
Mass of solution
 × 106 = 
–6 5.4 10 g
2.5 g
×
 × 106 = 2.16 ppm
Example 1.4
Express 5% (m/m) solution of NaCl in ppm.
Solution:
ppm = Mass percentage × 104
 = 5 × 104
For solutions that are even more dilute, parts per billion (ppb) is used. A concentration of
1 ppb represents 1 g of solute per billion (109) grams of solution.
ppb = 
Mass of solute
Mass of solution × 109
Exercise 1.5
1. A sample of 0.892 g of potassium chloride, KCl, is dissolved in 54.6 g of water.
What is the percent, by mass, of KCl in the solution?
2. a If 150 g of orange juice contains 120 mg of ascorbic acid (Vitamin C), what
is the concentration of ascorbic acid, expressed in ppm?
b Express the concentration of ascorbic acid given in (a)in ppb.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
26
1.5.2 Mole Fraction (X)
What is the difference between mole fraction of non-electrolytes and mole-fraction
of electrolytes?
The mole fraction (X) of a solute is the ratio of the number of moles of solute divided by the
total number of moles of a solution (moles of solute + moles of solvent).
Mole fraction for a non-electrolyte (X) =
Number of moles of solute
Number of moles of solute + Number of moles of solvent
or XSolute = 
Solute
Solute Solvent
n
n n + ; XSolvent = 
Solvent
Solvent Solute
n
n n +
A useful relation between Xsolute and Xsolvent is:
XSolvent + XSolute = 
Solvent
Solvent Solute
n
n n +
 + Solute
Solute Solvent
n
n n +
 = 1
For an electrolyte solution, the mole fraction is calculated by treating the cations and anions
as individual particles; hence,
XCations = 
Cations
Cations Anions Solvent
n
n + n + n
A similar expression can be written for XAnions.
Example 1.5
What is the mole fraction of I2
 in a solution containing 30 g of I2
 in 400 g of CCl4
?
Solution:
First find the number of moles of I2 and the number of moles of CCl4
Number of moles of I2 = 
2
2
Mass of I 30 g
Molar massof I 254 g / mol = = 0.12 mol I2
Number of moles of CCl4
 = 
4
4
Mass of CCl 400 g
Molar mass of CCl 254 g / mol = = 2.6 mol CCl4
XI
2 
= 2
2 4
I
I CCI
0.12 mol
0.12mol 2.6mol
n
n n = + +
 = 0.044
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
27
Exercise 1.6
1. 1 mole of alcohol is mixed with 3 moles of water. Calculate the mole fraction of
alcohol and water.
2. Determine the mole fraction of the substances in a solution containing 36 g of water
and 46 g of glycerine, C3H5(OH)3.
3. 0.1 mole of NaCl is dissolved in 10 moles of water. Calculate the mole fraction of
Na+ ions and Cl– ions.
1.5.3 Molarity (M)
Molarity or molar concentration is the number of moles of solute in 1 L of solution. Molarity
is determined by the equation
Molarity (M) = 
Number of moles of solute
Volume(L) of solution
But, Number of moles of solute = 
Mass of solute
Molar mass of solute
Therefore,
Molarity = 
Mass of solute
Molar mass of solute Volume(L) of solution ×
Example 1.6
What is the molar concentration of a solution containing 16.0 g of CH3OH in 200
mL of solution?
Solution:
Given: Required:
Mass of solute (CH3OH) = 16 g Molarity = ?
Volume of solution = 200 mL = 0.20 L
Molar mass of CH3OH = 32 g/mol
Molarity = 3
3
Mass of CH OH
Molar mass of CH OH Volume(L)of Solution ×
 = 
16 g
32 g / mol 0.20 L ×
 = 2.50 mol/L = 2.50 M
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
28
 Example 1.7
How many grams of potassium dichromate (K2Cr2O7) are required to prepare
250 mL of solution whose concentration is 2.16 M?
Solution:
Given: Required:
Volume of solution = 250 mL = 0.250 L Mass of K2Cr2O7 = ?
Molarity (M) of solution = 2.16 M
Molar mass of K2Cr2O7 = 294 g/mol
Molarity = 2 27
2 27
Mass of K Cr O
Molar mass of K Cr O Volume(L)of Solution ×
Mass of K2Cr2O7 = Molarity × Molar mass of K2Cr2
O7
 × Volume (L) of solution
= 2.16 mol/L × 294 g/mol × 0.250 L
= 159 g K2Cr2O7
Exercise 1.7
1. 5.85 g of sodium chloride (NaCl) is dissolved in 250 mL of solution. Calculate
a the molarity of the solution.
b the mass percentage of the solute.
2. How would 250 ml of 0.15 M KNO3 solution be prepared?
1.5.4 Normality (N)
What are number of equivalents and equivalent mass? How are they used in
calculating the normality of a solution?
The normality of a solution (N) is the number of equivalents of the solute contained in one
litre of solution.
Normality (N) = Number of equivalents of solute
Volume(L) of solution
The number of equivalents can be determined from the equivalent mass.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
29
* The equivalent mass of an acid is obtained by dividing its molar mass by the number
of H+ ions furnished by one formula unit of the acid, or by the number of hydroxide
ions with which one formula unit of the acid reacts.
The equivalent mass of HCl, for example, is the same as its molar mass, since it
contains one acidic hydrogen per molecule. The equivalent mass of sulphuric acid,
H2SO4, is usually half its molar mass, since both hydrogen are replaceable in most
reactions of dilute sulphuric acid. An equivalent of phosphoric acid may be 1 mol,
1/2 mol or 1/3 mol, depending on whether one, two or three hydrogen atoms per
molecule are replaced, respectively, in a particular reaction.
* The equivalent mass of a base is obtained by dividing its molar mass by the number
of OH– ions furnished by one formula unit of a base or the number of H+ ions with
which one formula unit of the base reacts. The equivalent mass of NaOH, for
example, is equal to its molar mass, since one mole furnishes only one mole of
OH– ion.
* The equivalent mass of an oxidizing agent or a reducing agent for a particular reaction
is equal to its molar mass divided by the total number of moles of electrons gained
or lost when the redox reaction occurs. For example, the equivalent mass of KMnO4
in the reaction
KMnO4 + KI + H2SO4 Æ K2SO4 + MnSO4 + I2 + H2O
is determined as follows.
The oxidation number of Mn ion is (+7) in KMnO4, and is changed to (+2) in MnSO4.
This shows that it is a 5-electron transfer reaction.
Equivalent mass of KMnO4 = 
Molar mass of KMnO4
Number of Electrons gained
 = 
158 g / mol
5eq / mol = 31.6 g/eq
* The equivalent mass of a salt is equal to its molar mass divided by number of
total positive charges (total positive valency).
Normality (N) = Number ofequivalentsof solute
Volume(L)of solution
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
30
or Normality (N) = 
Mass of solute
Equivalent massof solute Volume(L)of Solution ×
Notice that normality is molarity times n. It is always equal to or greater than molarity.
N = M × n
Where n is
* number of ionisable hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions per molecule for acids and
bases, respectively.
* total number of positive charges for salts.
* total number of electrons lost or gained in redox reactions.
Example 1.8
Calculate the number of equivalents present in 0.50 mol H3PO4 if the acid is
a completely neutralized to give PO3–
4
b converted to H2PO–
4
c converted to HPO2–
4
Solution:
a Since it is completely neutralized, a balanced equation is written as
H3PO4 Æ 3H+ + PO3–
4
From the reaction, one mole of H3PO4 produces three moles of H+ ions.
Therefore,
Number of equivalents = Moles of H3PO4 × 3
= 0.5 × 3 = 1.5 equivalents
b The reaction for the formation of H2PO–
4 is
H3PO4 Æ H+ + H2PO–
4
One mole of H3PO4 produces one mole of H+. Therefore,
Number of equivalents = moles of H3PO4 ×1
= 0.5 × 1 = 0.5 equivalents
c H3PO4 Æ 2H+ + HPO4
2–
One mole of H3PO4
 produces two moles H+. Therefore,
Number of equivalents = moles of H3PO4 × 2
= 0.5 × 2 = 1 equivalent
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
31
Example 1.9
Calculate the:
a normality b molarity
of 49 g of H2
SO4
 in 500 mL of solution?
Solution:
Given:
V = 500 mL = 0.5 L
Mass of H2SO4 = 49 g
a Normality = Number ofequivalents
Volume (L)of solution
Number of equivalents = 
Given mass
Equivalent mass
Equivalent mass = 
Molar mass
n
Since H2SO4 furnishes 2 moles of H+ ions, n equals 2.
fi Equivalent mass = 
Molar mass of H SO2 4
n
= 98g / mol
2 eq / mol = 49 g/eq
Number of equivalents = Given mass 49 g
Equivalent mass 49 g / eq = = 1 eq
Normality = Number ofequivalents 1 eq
Volume(L)of solution 0.5 L = = 2 N
b To find molarity, use the relation
N = n × M , where n = 2 for H2SO4
M = 
2
2
N
n = = 1 M
Example 1.10
Given the unbalanced equation
KMnO4 + KI + H2SO4 Æ K2SO4 + MnSO4 + I2 + H2O
a How many grams of KMnO4
 are needed to make 500 mL of 0.250 N solution?
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
32
b How many grams of KI are needed to make 25 mL of 0.36 N solution?
Solution:
a In the example given in the note above, we have seen that the equivalent mass
of KMnO4 is
Equivalent mass of KMnO4 = 
Molar mass
Number of electron gained per mole
= 
158 g / mol
5 eq / mol = 31.6
Normality (N) = 4
4
Mass of KMnO
Equivalent mass of KMnO Volume(L)of solution ×
Mass of KMnO4
 = Normality (N) × Equivalent mass of KMnO4 × Volume (L) solution
= 0.250 eq/L × 31.6 g/eq × 0.50 L = 3.95 g KMnO4
b In the given reaction, the oxidation state of iodine is changed from –1 in KI to
0 in I2.
Hence, equivalent mass of KI = 
Molar mass of KI
Number of electrons lost per mole
= 
166 g / mol
1 eq / mol
Mass of KI = Normality (N)× Equivalent mass of KI × Volume (L) of solution
= 0.36 eq/L × 166 g/eq × 0.025 L
= 1.49 g KI
Example 1.11
What is the normality of a solution that contains 2.94 g of K2Cr2O7 in 100 mL of
solution? What is its molarity? K2Cr2O7 is used as a salt.
Solution:
Given: Required:
Mass of K2Cr2O7 = 2.94 g Normality (N) = ?
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
33
Volume of solution = 100 mL = 0.10 L
Equivalent mass of K2Cr2O7 = 
Mass of K Cr O 2 27
Total positive valance per mole
= 
294g / mol
2 g / eq = 147 g/eq
Normality (N) = 2 27
2 27
Mass of K Cr O
Equivalent mass of K Cr O Volume(L) of solution ×
= 
2.94 g
147g / eq 0.10 L ×
= 0.2 N
 Molarity = Normality
n = 0.2N
2 = 0.1 M
Exercise 1.8
1. How many equivalents of solute are contained in
a 1 L of 2 N solution?
b 1 L of 0.5 N solution?
c 0.5 L of 0.2 N solution?
2. Calculate the mass of Al2(SO4)3 in 250 mL of solution if the concentration
is 0.48 N.
3. Calculate the molarity and normality of a solution that contains 16.2 g of the salt
Fe2(SO4)
3 in 200 mL of solution.
1.5.5 Molality (m)
What is the difference between molarity and molality?
The molality of a solution is the number of moles of solute per kilogram of solvent contained
in a solution.
Note that molal solutions are prepared by measuring masses of solute and solvent, not
volumes of solvent or solution.
Molality (m) = 
Number of moles of solute
Mass (kg)of solvent , or
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
34
Molality (m) = Mass of solute
Molar mass of solute Mass (kg) of solvent ×
Example 1.12
Calculate the molality of a solution prepared by dissolving 32.0 g of CaCl2
 in 271 g
of water.
Solution:
Given: Required:
Mass of CaCl2 = 32.0 g Molality (m) =?
Mass of H2O = 271 g = 0.271 kg
Molality (m) = 2
2 2
Mass of CaCl
Molar mass of CaCl Mass (kg)of H O ×
= 
32.0 g
111 g / mol 0.271 kg ×
 = 1.06 m CaCl2
Exercise 1.9
A solution of hydrochloric acid contains 36 percent HCl, by mass
a Calculate the mole fraction of HCl in the solution.
b Calculate the molality of HCl in the solution.
c What additional information would you need to calculate the molarity of the solution?
1.5.6 Conversion of Concentration Units
All the terms we just discussed represent different ways of expressing concentration. How
can you convert one concentration unit to another? Observe the following guidelines
when you convert one concentration unit to another.
* If the density and mass of a solution are given, you can determine the volume of the
solution. Similarly, if the density and volume of a solution are given, you can calculate
the mass of the solution.
* Molality involves quantity of solvent, whereas the other concentration units involve
quantity of solution.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
35
Example 1.13
Hydrogen peroxide is a powerful oxidizing agent used in concentrated solution in
rocket fuels and, in dilute solution, in hair bleach. An aqueous solution of H2O2 is
30% by mass and has a density of 1.11 g/mL. Calculate the:
a molality of the solution
b mole fraction of H2O2
c molarity of the solution
Solution:
a For molality, we need the number of moles of solute and the mass (kg) of
solvent. If we assume 100 g of H2O2 solution, we can express the mass
percentage directly as mass of substance. We subtract the mass of H2O2 to
obtain the mass of solvent. To find molality, we convert mass of H2
O2 to moles
and divide by mass of solvent.
Mass of solvent (H2O) = Mass of solution – Mass of solute
= 100.0 g – 30.0 g = 70.0 g
Moles of H2O2 = 
30.0g
34g / mol = 0.882 mol H2O2
Molality (m) = moles of H O 0.882 mol 2 2
Mass (kg)of solvent 0.070 kg =
 = 12.6 m H2O2 solution
b To find the mole fraction, you use the number of moles of H2O2
 from part a and
convert the mass of H2
O to moles.
Number of moles of H2O2 = 0.882 mol H2O2
Number of moles of H2O = 70.0 g
18 g / mol = 3.88 mol of H2O
2 2
2 2
22 2
moles of H O 0.882
moles of H O moles of H O 0.822 3.88
X H O = = + + = 0.185
c To find molarity, we assume 100.0 g of solution and use the given solution
density to find the volume.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
36
Density = 
Mass
Volume
 Volume of solution = 
Mass of solution
Density of solution
= 
100.0 g
1.11 g / mL
= 90.1 mL
 Molarity (M) = 
Number of moles of solute
Volume(L) of solution
= 
0.882 mol
0.090L = 9.79 M H2O2 solution
Exercise 1.10
1. A sample of commercial concentrated hydrochloric acid is 11.8 M HCl and has a
density of 1.190 g/mL. Calculate
a the mass % of HCl
b the molality of HCl
c the mole fraction of HCl
2. The mole fraction of ethanol in water is 0.3. Calculate
a the molality of the solution
b the mass percent of ethanol
1.6 PREPARATION OF SOLUTIONS
At the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Prepare molar solutions, normal solutions and molal solutions of different substances;
• Explain dilution process and calculate the volume or concentration changes during
the dilution of solutions; and
• Prepare a dilute solution from a concentrated solution.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
37
 Experiment 1.5
Preparation of Solutions of Known Concentrations
Objective:To prepare a 1 molar NaCl solution and a 1 molar table-sugar solution.
Apparatus and Chemicals: 200 mL volumetric flasks, stirrers, beakers, measuring
cylinders, balance, sodium chloride, sugar, and water.
Procedure 1:
1. Weigh 11.7 g of sodium chloride, using a balance, and add to a beaker.
2. Add about 50 mL of water to the beaker containing the sodium chloride and
dissolve it by stirring.
3. Using a funnel, transfer the solution to the volumetric flask.
4. Slowly add more water to the volumetric flask until the solution reaches the volume
mark.
Observations and analysis:
a How many moles of sodium chloride did you use to prepare the solution?
b What are the molarity and normality of the solution?
Procedure 2:
1. Weigh a beaker and record its mass. Then add 50 g of water. Perform the
measurement and calculations:
Mass of beaker _______________
Mass of beaker + mass of water _______________
Mass of water _______________
2. Weigh 17.1 g of table sugar. _______________
3. Dissolve the 17.1 g of table sugar in the beaker containing 50 g of water, by
stirring.
Observations and analysis:
Calculate:
a mass percent of the solution.
b mole fraction of the solution.
c molality of the solution.
How do you prepare a solution of known concentration?
A common task in school, medical, industrial and other chemical laboratories is the preparation
of solutions of known concentrations. For aqueous solutions, distilled, de-mineralized or
de-ionized water is used. Other solvents can also be used, depending on the solution
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
38
Activity 1.9
specified. Solutions are usually prepared from solutes of liquids or solids. Occasionally
they are prepared from gases. First, the solute is accurately weighed and transferred to a
volumetric flask, then water is added through a funnel (Figure 1.13 a). Next, the solid is
slowly dissolved by gently swirling the flask (Figure 1.13 b). After all the solid has dissolved,
more water is slowly added to bring the level of solution exactly to the volume mark
(Figure 1.13 c). Knowing the volume of the solution in the flask and the quantity of compound
(the number of moles), you can calculate the molarity of the solution using the formula of
molarity.
a bc
Figure 1.13 Preparation of a solution of known molarity.
A one-molar solution of NaCl can be prepared by dissolving 58.5 g of NaCl in water until
the solution becomes one litre.
Dissolve 1g each of NaCl, CuSO4
, and KMnO4
 in different 50 mL measuring flasks. Note the
colour intensity of the solutions.
Take 25 mL of solution from each flask and further dilute each solution to 50 mL.
Note the colour intensity again.
What did you observe? Can you correlate the colour intensity with the concentration of
the solution? Does this analogy works for colourless solution also? Discuss your
observations with your classmates.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
39
Diluting Solutions
Concentrated solutions are often stored in the laboratory as “stock” solutions for use as
needed. Frequently we dilute this stock solution before working with them.
Dilution is the procedure for preparing a less-concentrated solution from a moreconcentrated one.
In carrying out a dilution process, it is useful to remember that adding more solvent to a
given amount of the stock solution changes (decreases) the concentration of the solution
without changing the number of moles of solute present in the solution. In other words,
 Number of moles of solute before dilution = Number of moles of solute after dilution
Since number of moles of solute = molarity × volume of solution,
= M × V
Number of of moles of solute before dilution = Mi
Vi
Number of moles of solute after dilution = Mf
Vf
Therefore, dilution can be expressed as
Mi
Vi
 = Mf
Vf
or, more generally,
Ci
Vi
 = Cf
Vf
Where Ci
 is initial concentration, Cf
 is final concentration, Vi
 is initial volume and Vf
 is
final volume.
Example 1.14
Describe how you would prepare 5.00 × 102 mL of a 1.75 M H2SO4 solution,
starting with an 8.61 M stock solution of H2SO4.
Solution:
Because the concentration of the final solution is less than that of the original one,
this is a dilution process.
Given: Required:
Mi
 = 8.61 M Vi
 = ?
Mf
 = 1.75 M
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
40
 Experiment 1.6
Vf
 = 5.00 × 102 mL
Mi
Vi
 = Mf
Vf
Vi
 = 
2 1.75 × 5.0 × 10 
 = 
8.61 
f f
i
M ×V M mL
M M
 = 102 mL
Thus, we must dilute 102 mL of 8.61 M H2
SO4
 solution with sufficient water to
give a final volume of 5.0 × 102 mL.
Preparation of Solution of Lower Concentration from Standard
Stock Solution
Objective:To prepare diluted solution of H2SO4
Apparatus: burette, beaker, stirrer, funnel, stand with clamp
Chemicals: 18 M H2SO4, distilled water.
Procedure:
1. Carefully add the concentrated acid into the burette.
2. Slowly add with stirring 10.0 mL of the acid into a beaker containing 50 mL of
distilled water.
3. Transfer the new solution into a volumetric flask (1 L) and add water up to the mark.
Observations and analysis:
From Procedure 1 and 2:
a Why are acid added to the water not the water to the acid?
b Explain whether volume, mass or number of moles of the solute is changed or not
in the process.
c What is the new concentration of the H2SO4?
From Procedure 3:
d Calculate concentration of the new solution.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
41
Activity 1.10
Exercise 1.11
a How do you prepare 60.0 mL of 0.2 M HNO3 from a stock solution of 4 M
HNO3?
b You have 100 mL of a 0.5 M HCl solution, and you want to dilute it to exactly
0.1 M. How much water should you add?
1.7 SOLUTION STOICHIOMETRY
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• Use stoichiometerically equivalent molar ratios to calculate the amounts of reactants
and products in a reaction of pure and dissolved substances.
In Grade 9 Chemistry, you learned the stoichiometry of pure substances. What does
stoichiometry mean? How can you apply it to solutions? Form a group and discuss these
questions.
Since many environmental reactions and almost all biochemical reactions occur in solution,
an understanding of reactions in solution is extremely important in chemistry and related
sciences.
Solution stoichiometry differs from pure-substances stoichiometry in that the amount of a
pure substance can be obtained by converting its mass into moles. For substances in
solution, we must know the concentration to find the volume that contains a given number
of moles. Thus, the concept of molarity is very important in solution stoichiometry.
You can think of molarity as a conversion factor. We use it to convert the volume of a
solution to the number of moles of a solute. From the result, we can find the mass or the
number of particles of a solute.
Mole-Mass Problems
The relationship between the mass of a substance and the corresponding number of moles
is governed by the molar mass of the substance. But, for problems involving substances in
solution, we need to know the concentration of the solution before we can find the number
of moles.
Mole of a substance = Concentration × Volume
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
42
Example 1.15
What volume of 1.40 M H2
SO4
 solution is needed to react exactly with 100 g of
Al? The balanced molecular equation for the reaction is
2Al + 2H SO Al SO + 2H 24 2 4 → ( )2 2
Solution:
We use the mole-mass method:
Number of moles of Al = 100 g = 3.70 mol
27.0 g mol
From the balanced equation, 2 moles of Al reacts with 2 moles of H2SO4. To find
the number of moles of H2SO4 that reacts with 3.70 moles of Al, we proceed as
follows: 2 moles of Al needs 2 moles of H2SO4
3.7 moles Al needs X moles of H2SO4, therefore
X = 
3.7 mol Al×2 mol H SO 2 4
2 mol Al
X = 3.7 mol H2SO4
Volume of 1.40 M H2SO4 containing 3.70 mol
2 4
–1
umber of moles of H SO 3.70 mol = molarity 1.40 mol L
N
 = 2.64 L
Exercise 1.12
1. What volume of 1M HCl solution is required to react with 6 g of magnesium?
Reaction: Mg (s) + 2HCl (aq) Æ MgCl2 (aq) + H2 (g)
2. What volume of 0.25 M NaOH solution is needed to react with 50 mL of 0.125 M
H2SO4?
Reaction: 2NaOH (aq) + H2SO4 (aq) Æ Na2SO4 (aq) + H2O (l)
3. Calcium hydroxide is sometimes used in water treatment plants to purify water for
residential use. Calculate the volume of 0.0250 M calcium hydroxide solution that
can react completely with 25.0 mL of 0.125 mol L–1 aluminium sulphate solution.
Reaction: Al2(SO4)3(aq) + 3Ca(OH)2(aq) Æ 2Al(OH)3(aq) + 3CaSO4(s)
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
43
Mole-Volume Problems
In this type of problem, the concentration of the solution is given, and you are asked to
determine the volume of the solution that contains a required number of moles or vice
versa.
Example 1.16
Ammonium sulphate is manufactured by reacting sulphuric acid with ammonia.
What concentration of sulphuric acid is needed to react with 24.4 mL of a 2.20
mol L–1 ammonia solution, if 50.0 mL of sulphuric acid is used?
 H2
SO4 (aq) + 2NH3 (aq) Æ (NH4
)2
SO4 (aq)
Solution:
First, we calculate the number of moles of H2SO4
 that react with the given amount
of ammonia. To do this, we need to know the number of moles of NH3.
Number of moles of NH3 = Molarity of NH3 × Volume (L) of solution
= 2.20 mol L–1× 0.0244 L
= 0.0537 mol
From the balanced equation above, 2 mol NH3
 reacts with 1 mol H2
SO4
. Therefore,
the number of moles of H2SO4 that reacts with 0.0537 moles of NH3 is
3
3
2 4 0.0537 mol NH × 1 mol H SO
2 mol NH = 0.0268 mol H2SO4
Concentration (molarity of H2SO4) = 
0.0268 mol
0.05 L
 = 0.536 M
Mole-Number of Particles Problems
How do you relate number of moles and number of particles?
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
44
Example 1.17
What volume of 0.5 M glucose (C6H12O6) contains 3.01 × 1022 molecules of
glucose?
Solution:
We first change 3.01 × 1022 molecules of glucose to moles of glucose.
1 mole of glucose contains 6.02 × 1023 molecules.
Therefore, 3.01 × 1022 molecules of glucose will be
22
23
1 mol × 3.01 × 10 molecule
6.02 × 10 molecule
 = 0.05 mol
Since,
Number of moles = Concentration × Volume
Volume = 
Number of moles 0.05 mol
Concentration = 0.500 mol 1 L– = 0.1 L = 100 mL
1.8 DESCRIBING REACTIONS IN SOLUTION
At the end of this section, you should able to:
• explain the relationship between reacting ions, spectator ions, precipitation and
solubility;
• write net ionic equations.
What is the difference between molecular equations and ionic equations? What
are spectator ions?
We use chemical equations to help us describe reactions. Reaction involving ions can be
presented with different types of chemical equations. The one we use depends on the kind
of information we want to convey. We can represent such a reaction by a molecular equation
or an ionic equation.
1.8.1 Molecular Equation
A molecular equation is a chemical equation in which the reactants and the products are
written as if they were molecular substances, even though they may actually exist in solution
as ions. Molecular equations are useful because they are explicit about what the reactants
are and what products you obtain.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
45
Consider the reaction between calcium chloride, CaCl2
, and sodium carbonate, Na2
CO3
,
in aqueous solution to give solid calcium carbonate and aqueous sodium chloride. The
equation for this reaction may be written as:
CaCl2 (aq) + Na2
CO3 (aq) → CaCO3 (s) + 2NaCl (aq)
The molecular equation closely describes what is actually done in the laboratory or in an
industrial process.
1.8.2 Ionic Equation
Although a molecular equation is useful in describing the actual reactants and products, it
does not give any information about what is happening at the level of ions. Since this kind
of information is very useful, you often need to write the molecular equation as an ionic
equation.
Consider the reaction of calcium chloride and sodium carbonate. Both are soluble ionic
substances and are strong electrolytes. When they dissolve in water, they go into solution
as ions. Each formula unit of CaCl2
 forms one Ca2+ ion and two Cl–
 ions in solution. So,
instead of CaCl2
(aq), it would be better to write Ca2+(aq) + 2Cl–
(aq). Similarly, each
formula unit of Na2
CO3
 forms two Na+
 ions and one CO2–
3 ion in solution, and this can be
written as 2Na+
(aq) + CO2–
3 (aq) instead of Na2
CO3
(aq). The reactant side of the reaction
becomes
Ca2+(aq) + 2Cl–
(aq) + 2Na+(aq) + CO2–
3 (aq)
On the product side of the equation, CaCO3
(s) is an ionic compound, but the ions are held
together in particular sites in the crystalline solid. We leave the formula as CaCO3
(s) to
convey this information in the equation. On the other hand, NaCl is a soluble ionic compound
and is a strong electrolyte. Also it dissolves in aqueous solution to give freely moving ions.
Therefore, we can write it as Na+
(aq) + Cl–
(aq).
The complete equation is
Ca2+(aq) + 2Cl–
(aq) + 2Na+(aq) + CO2–
3 (aq) → CaCO3
(s) + 2Na+(aq) + 2Cl–
(aq)
The ions appearing on both sides of the equation (Na+
 and Cl–
) are called spectator ions,
as they do not take part in the reaction and they can be cancelled on both sides to express
the essential reaction that occurs.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
46
Ca2+(aq) + 2Cl–
(aq) + 2Na+(aq) + CO2–
3 (aq) → CaCO3
(s) + 2Na+(aq) + 2Cl–
(aq)
The resulting equation is:
Ca2+(aq) + CO2–
3 (aq) → CaCO3
(s)
This net ionic equation, is without spectator ions and the reaction that actually occurs at an
ionic level is between calcium ions and carbonate ions which form solid calcium carbonate.
Activity 1.11
Form a group and discuss the following:
1. How are sodium carbonate and calcium hydroxide found in water solution? Write
dissociation reaction for each of them.
2. Write the ionic equation for the reaction between sodium carbonate and calcium
hydroxide. Are the products formed soluble in water?
3. Write the soluble product in ionic form. Are there the same ions in the reactant and
product side?
4. Write the net ionic equation.
Exercise 1.13
For each of the following molecular equations, write ionic equation, write a net ionic
equation, and identify the spectator ions:
a 3 24 24 3 2AgNO (aq) + Na CrO (aq) Ag CrO (s) + 2NaNO (aq) →
b 42 4 2 2 2HClO (aq) + Ca(OH) (aq) Ca(ClO ) (aq) + 2H O (l) →
c 3 22 3 2 2HNO (aq) + Mg(OH) (s) 2H O(l) + Mg(NO ) (aq) →
d 3 2 2 4 4 3 Pb(NO ) (aq) + Na SO (aq) PbSO (s) + 2NaNO (aq) →
1.9 COLLIGATIVE PROPERTIES OF SOLUTION
At the end of this section, you should be able to:
• define colligative properties:
• list the important properties of solvents that are affected by the formation of a solution;
• state Raoult’s law;
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
47
• explain the change in the colligative properties of solvent when a certain solute is
added;
• describe the Van’t Hoff’s factor;
• calculate the vapour pressure, boiling point, and freezing point of a solvent after a
given amount of solute is dissolved in it;
• define osmosis and osmotic pressure of a solution;
• calculate the osmotic pressure of a solution; and
• compare and contrast change in colligative properties of electrolytic and non
electrolytic solution.
What is meant by colligative? Why does the addition of ethylene glycol lower the
freezing point and raise the boiling point of water? Discuss this question with
your classmates.
Certain physical properties of solutions differ in important ways from those of pure solvents.
For example, pure water at 1 atm pressure freezes at 0°C, while an aqueous solutions at 1
atm pressure freezes at a lower temperature. Ethylene glycol is added to water in radiators of
cars as antifreeze to lower the freezing point of the solution. This also raises the boiling point
of the solution above that of pure water, permitting operation of engines at higher temperatures.
The lowering of the freezing point and the raising of the boiling point are examples of the
physical properties of solutions that depend on the quantity (concentration) of the solute but
not on the kind of solute particle. Properties that depend on the number of particles or
concentration of the solute in the given amount of solvent and not on their nature are called
colligative properties. (Colligative is a Latin word that means “depending on the collection”.)
There are four important properties of a solution that are affected by the addition of a nonvolatile solute to a solvent. These are:
1. Vapour pressure lowering
2. Boiling point elevation
3. Freezing point depression
4. Osmotic pressure
1.9.1 Vapour Pressure Lowering
How do non-volatile solutes affect the vapour pressure of the solvent?
If a solute is non-volatile i.e., it does not have a measurable vapour pressure, the vapour
pressure of its solution is always less than that of the pure solvent. Vapour pressure lowering
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
48
is the lowering of the vapour pressure of the solvents that results when a non-volatile solute
is added to form a solution. The solute prevents (blanket) the tendency of the solvent to
escape and it also lowers the vapour pressure of the solvent (Figure 1.14). Thus, the
relationship between solution vapour pressure and solvent vapour pressure depends on
the concentration of the solute in the solution.
Solute particles
Solvent Solution
Figure 1.14 shows the lowering of the rate of vaporization of a solvent when a nonvolatile solute is added.
The relationship between solution vapour pressure and solvent vapour pressure is expressed
by Raoult’s law. This law states that “the partial pressure of a solvent over a solution,
P1, is given by the vapour pressure of the pure solvent, times the mole fraction of the
solvent in the solution, x1 , at constant temperature”.
P1 = x1P°
1
DP = P°
1 – P1
where DP = Change in vapour pressure (vapour pressure lowering)
P° = Vapour pressure of pure solvent
P1 = Vapour pressure of solvent in solution
Note that the vapour pressure of a solvent is not a colligative property. Only the change in
vapour pressure, ∆P, which occurs when a solute is added to the solvent, is a colligative
property. It can be defined as the difference between the vapour pressure of the pure
solvent and the vapour pressure of solvent in the solution.
In a solution containing only one solute, x1 = 1 – x2, where x2 is the mole fraction of the
solute. Inserting this into the Raoult’s-law equation gives:
P1 = (1 – x2) P°
1
P1 = P°
1 – P°
1 x2
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
49
P°
1 – P1= P°
1 x2
∆P = P°
1 x2
Example 1.18
Calculate the vapour pressure of water at 90 °C in a solution containing 5.0 g of
glucose (C6H12O6) in 100 g of water. The vapour pressure of pure water at
90 °C is 525.8 Pa.
Solution:
Given:
Mass of C6H12O6 = 5.0 g
Mass of water = 100 g
Vapour pressure of pure water at 90oC = 525.8 Pa
Required:
Vapour pressure of water in a solution P1 = ?
First, we find mole fractions of both solute and solvent. To do this, we must find
the number of moles of glucose and water.
Number of moles of C6H12O6 = 6 12 6
6 12 6 CH O
Mass of CH O 5.0 g
 = 
Molar mass of 180 g mol
 = 0.028 mol
Number of moles of H2O = 100 g
18 g mol = 5.56 mol
CH O 6 12 6
0.028 mol
 0.005
0.028 mol + 5.56 mol
x = = 
H O2
5.56 mol
 = 0.995
5.56 mol + 0.028 mol
x = 
 1 HO 1 2 P = x P°
 = 0.995 × 525.8 Pa = 523.17 Pa
 DP = P° – P
 = 525.8 Pa – 523.17 Pa = 2.63 Pa
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
50
Example 1.19
Calculate the vapour pressure of a solution made by dissolving 218 g of glucose in
460 mL of water at 30 °C. What is the vapour pressure lowering? (Assume that
the density of water is 1.00 g/mL). Vapour pressure of water at 30 °C is
31.82 torr.
Solution:
Given: Required:
Mass of solute (C6H12O6) = 218 g P1 (vapour pressure of solution) = ?
Volume of water = 460 mL = 0.46 L DP (lowering in vapour pressure) = ?
From Raoult’s law
P1 = x1 P°
1
To determine the number of moles of H2O, its density is used.
460 mL 1 mL 1 g → × 1 g
1 mL = 460 g
460 mL Æ?
Number of moles of H2O = 460 g 25.56 mol
18 g mol
 = 
Number of mole of C6H12O6 = 
218 g
180 g mol
 = 1.21 mol
H O2
25.56 mol = = 0.955
25.56 mol + 1.21 mol
x
CH O 6 12 6
1.2 mol = = 0.045
1.21 mol + 25.56 mol
x
P1 = x1 P°
1
P°
1 is the vapour pressure of water at 30°C, which is equal to 31.82 torr.
P1 = 0.955 × 31.82 torr
 = 30.4 torr
DP = P° – P
= 31.82 torr – 30.4 torr
= 1.42 torr
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
51
Exercise 1.14
1. Why is the vapour pressure of a solution less than that of the pure solvent?
2. The vapour pressure of pure water at 110°C is 1070 torr. A solution of ethylene
glycol in water has a vapour pressure of 1.00 atm at 110°C. Assuming that Raoult’s
law is obeyed, what is the mole fraction of ethylene glycol in water?
3. Calculate the vapour pressure lowering, DP, when 10.0 mL of glycerol (C3H8
O3)
is added to 500.0 mL of water at 50°C. At this temperature, the vapour pressure
of pure water is 92.5 torr and its density is 0.988 g/mol. The density of glycerol is
1.26 g/mL.
Solutions that obey Raoult’s law are said to be ideal solutions. If both components of a
solution are volatile, i.e., have measurable vapour pressure, the vapour pressure of the
solution is the sum of the individual partial vapour pressures. Thus, for two volatile
components, A and B, the vapour pressure of each component above the solution is
proportional to its mole fraction in the solution.
PA = xA P°
A
PB = xB P°
B
According to Dalton’s law of partial pressure, at constant temperature, the pressure of a
mixture of gases is equal to the sum of the partial pressures of all of the constituent gases.
The total pressure, is:
=+= +° ° PT A B AA B B P P xP x P
This can be shown graphically as in Figure 1.15, assuming that A is more volatile than B.
Figure 1.15 Vapour pressure versus mole fraction for an ideal solution.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
52
Ideal solutions are characterized by the following properties:
i) The volume of an ideal solution is the sum of the volumes of its pure components.
i.e., there is no expansion or contraction on mixing.
ii) The heat of a solution is zero. i.e., mixing is neither exothermic nor endothermic.
Intermolecular forces between solute-solute and solute-solvent molecules are equal,
as are those between solvent-solvent molecules and solute-solvent molecules.
iii) The vapour pressure above the solution is equal to the sum of the individual partial
vapour pressures.
iv) The components have similarity in their chemical structures.
v) The solutions obey Raoult’s law.
Can you give examples of an ideal solution?
Many solutions do not behave ideally. They deviate from Raoult’s law and are said to be
non-ideal. Here, we can consider the following two cases.
Case 1: If the intermolecular forces between A and B molecules are weaker than those
between A and A molecules and those between B and B molecules, then there is
a greater tendency for A-B molecules to leave the solution, compared to the case
of an ideal solution. Consequently, the vapour pressure of the solution is greater
than the sum of the vapour pressures that would be predicted by Raoult’s law for
the same concentration.
This behaviour exemplifies the positive deviation from Raoult’s law (Figure
1.16 a). In this case, the heat of mixing is an endothermic process.
Case 2: If A molecules attract B molecules more strongly than they do their own kind,
then the escaping tendency decreases and the vapour pressure of the solution is
less than the sum of the vapour pressures as predicted by Raoult’s law.
Here, we have a negative deviation from Raoult’s law, and mixing is an exothermic
process (Figure 1.16 b).
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
53
 
T = constant
Non-ideal solution
Vapour Pressure
Ideal solution
PT
PT
PA
PA
PB
PB
T = constant
Non-ideal solution
Ideal solution
Vapour Pressure
PT
PT
PA
PA
PB
PB
a) Positive deviation b) Negative deviation
XA = 0 XA = 1 XA = 0 XA = 1
XB = 1 XB = 0 XB = 1 XB = 0
(Dotted lines show the expected values and the solid lines show the observed values).
Figure 1.16 Vapour pressure versus mole fraction for real solutions.
1.9.2 Boiling Point Elevation
Which do you think has a higher boiling point, a pure solvent or a solution
containing a non-volatile solute? Why?
The boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which its vapour pressure equals the
atmospheric pressure. If a non-volatile solute is added to a solvent, the solution’s boiling
point will be increased. This is due to the fact that the vapour pressure of a solvent at a
given temperature is lowered by the presence of a non-volatile solute in it, because less
number of solvent molecules are available on the surface exposed to atmosphere in presence
of solute molecules, as shown in Figure 1.14. Therefore, such a solution must be heated to
a higher temperature than the pure solvent in order for its vapour pressure to be equal to
the atmospheric pressure.
The boiling-point elevation (DTb
) is defined as the boiling point of the solution (Tb
) minus
the boiling point of the pure solvent (Tb
°).
DTb = Tb – Tb
°
The elevation in boiling point (DTb) is directly proportional to the molality of the solution.
That is:
DTb a m
DTb = Kbm
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
54
where m is the molality of the solution, and Kb
 is the molal boiling point elevation constant
for the solvent.
Table 1.2 Boiling points, molal boiling point elevation constants, freezing points and
molal freezing point depression constants of some solvents at 1 atm pressure.
Solvent Boiling Kb (°C/m) Freezing Kf (°C/m)
point (°C) point (°C)
Acetic acid (C2H4O2) 118.10 3.07 16.60 3.90
Benzene (C6H6) 80.10 2.53 5.50 5.12
Camphor (C10H16O) 208.00 5.95 179.00 39.70
Carbon disulfide (CS2) 46.30 2.34 – 111.50 3.83
Chloroform (CHCl3) 61.26 3.63 – 63.50 4.70
Cyclohexane (C6H12) 80.70 2.79 6.60 20.00
Nitrobenzene (C6H5NO2) 210.88 5.24 5.70 7.00
Phenol (C6H5OH) 182.00 3.56 43.00 7.40
Water (H2O) 100.00 0.51 0.00 1.86
Example 1.20
Calculate the boiling point of a 0.33 m solution of a solute in benzene.
(Kb = 2.53°C /m).
Solution:
Given: Required:
Molality = 0.33 m Boiling point of the solution?
Kb = 2.53°C /m
DTb = Kbm,
DTb = 2.53°C /m × 0.33 m = 0.83°C
Therefore, the boiling point of the solution is determined from the boiling point of
the pure solvent benzene (Table 1.2) and the change, in boiling point, DTb
.
Boiling point of the solution = 80.1°C + 0.83°C
 = 80.93°C
 Example 1.21
Calculate the boiling point of a solution that contains 200 g of sucrose, C12H22O11,
in 500 g of water.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
55
Solution:
From the given masses of solute and solvent, we can find the molality of the solution.
 Molality (m) = 
2
Mass of sucrose
Molar mass of sucrose × Mass of H O in kg
= 
200g
342g / mol 0.5 kg × = 1.17 m
DTb = Kbm, from Table 1.2, Kb for H2O is 0.512°C /m
Therefore, DTb = 0.512°C/m × 1.17 m = 0.6°C
Since the normal boiling point of water is 100°C, the boiling point of the solution
will be equal to 100°C + 0.6°C = 100.6°C.
Exercise 1.15
1. What is the boiling point of 1.93 m solution of a non-volatile solute in nitrobenzene?
2. Automotive antifreeze consists of ethylene glycol, C2H6O2, a non-volatile
non-electrolyte solute. Calculate the boiling point of a 25.0 mass percent solution
of ethylene glycol in water.
1.9.3 Freezing Point Depression
Activity 1.12
Discuss in group and account for the following processes. Report your idea to the class.
1. In countries with extremely cold conditions, anti-freezing substances like ethylene
glycol (C2
H6
O2
) are used in the cooling system of the automobiles.
2. Salts such as NaCl or CaCl2
 can be used to prepare ice cream or to de-ice the roads.
When a solution begins to freeze, the component that crystalize out first is almost pure.
Pure ice, for example, crystallizes out of a solution of salt and water. Solute particles,
because of their different size and shape, do not fit into the crystal lattice of the frozen
solvent. They tend to concentrate in the remaining liquid, and they interfere with the freezing
process by getting in the way of solvent molecules looking for lattice sites. This interference
causes the solution to freeze at lower temperature than the pure solvent. The greater the
concentration of the solution, the greater the interference and therefore, the lower the
freezing point of the solution.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
56
The freezing point depression (DTf
) is defined as the freezing point of the pure solvent (T)
minus the freezing point of the solution (Tf
).
DTf = T – Tf
The freezing point depression (DTf
) of solutions of nonelectrolytes has been found to be
equal to the molality of the solution times a proportionality constant. This constant is the
molal freezing point depression constant, Kf ,of the solvent.
DTf = Kfm
Example 1.22
The freezing point of pure camphor (C10H16O), T°
f
, is 179.0°C, and its Kf
 is
39.70°C kg/mol. Find the freezing point of a solution containing 1.50 g of a
compound of molecular mass 125, dissolved in 35 g camphor (solvent).
Solution:
First we find number of moles of the compound
Number of moles = 1.5 g 0.012 mol
125 g mol
 = 
Molality = 0.012 mol 0.343 mol kg 0.035 kg
Number of moles of solute
 = = 
Weight (kg) of solvent
DTf
 = Kfm = 39.7°C kg/mol × 0.343 mol/kg
 = 13.6°C
The normal freezing point of camphor is lowered by 13.6°C. Therefore, the freezing
point of the solution, Tf
, will be:
DTf
 = T– Tf
 = 179.0°C – 13.6°C = 165.4°C
Exercise 1.16
1. Calculate the freezing point of a solution that contains 60.0 g of urea, N2H4
CO, in
500.0 g of water.
2. Calculate the molecular mass of sulphur if 35.5 g of sulphur dissolves in 100.0 g of
CS2 to produce a solution that has a boiling point of 49.48°C.
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
57
1.9.3 Osmosis and Osmotic Pressure
How do you calculate osmotic pressure?
Osmosis is the selective passage of solvent molecules through a porous (semi- permeable)
membrane from a dilute to a more concentrated solution or from the solvent side into the
solution side.
Figure 1.17 shows two solutions on equal level, separated by a semi-permeable membrane.
Solvent molecules move through the membrane from left to right. As a result, the liquid
levels in the two arms become uneven. Eventually, the pressure difference resulting from
the unequal heights of the liquid in the two arms becomes so large that the net flow of
solvent ceases. Alternatively, we may apply pressure to the right arm of the apparatus, as
shown in Figure 1.17 b, to stop the net flow of solvent either way.
The pressure required to prevent osmosis is known as the osmotic pressure, p, of the
solution.
Figure 1.17 Apparatus for measuring osmotic pressure.
Jacobus Henricus Van’t Hoff found that the osmotic pressure obeys a law similar to the
ideal gas law, PV = nRT,
where V is the volume of the solution, n is the number of moles of solute, R is the ideal gas
constant, and T is the temperature on the Kelvin scale. From the equation, we can write:
p = = = M      
n P RT RT
V
where M is the molarity of the solution.
Like other colligative properties, osmotic pressure can be used to determine the molar
mass of solute. Especially osmotic pressure is used in biological laboratories to determine
molecular masses of huge molecules like proteins and nucleic acids.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
58
Example 1.23
What is the osmotic pressure at 17°C of 150 mL aqueous solution containing
1.75 g of sucrose (C12H22O11) per 150 mL of solution?
Solution:
First we calculate the molarity (M) of the solution
Molarity (M) = 
Number of moles of solute
Volume (L) of solution
= 
1.75 g ( ) 342 g mol
 = 0.034 mol L
0.150 L
 p = MRT
= 0.0851mol Latm /L 0.0821
mol (290K)=0.812 atm
K
   
 
Example 1.24
In an experiment to measure the molar mass of polyethylene, 2.20 g of polyethylene
plastic was dissolved in enough toluene to produce a 100 mL solution. Its osmotic
pressure at 25°C was measured as 1.10 × 10–2 atm. Calculate the molar mass of
polyethylene.
Solution:
From the equation, π = MRT ⇒ M = 
π
RT
M = 
( )
–2 1.10 × 10 –4 4.5 × 10 mol L
L.atm 0.0821 298 K
mol.K
 atm
 =      
That is, 1 L solution contains 4.5 × 10–4 mole of polyethylene. The amount of
polyethylene in 100 mL of the solution is therefore
 1 L Æ 4.5 × 10–4 mol
 0.10 L Æ ?
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
59
Amount of polyethylene (mol) =
–4 0.10 L × 4.5 × 10 mol
1 L
 = 4.5 × 10–5 mol
Molar mass of polyethylene ( ) –5
2.20 g
4.5 × 10 g mol = mol
 = 4.89 × 104 g / mol
Activity 1.13
Take 5%,10% and 20% solutions of sucrose in water.
Take 3 potatoes of almost equal size and make one cubic hole in each potato of equal
dimensions.
Fill the holes with water and keep these potatoes in different solutions of sucrose.
Observe the change in the water level at different time intervals.
Discuss your observations with your teacher as well as classmates.
Exercise 1.17
1. A sample of 2.05 g of polystyrene plastic was dissolved in enough toluene to form
100 mL of solution. The osmotic pressure of this solution was found to be 1.21
kPa at 25°C. Calculate the molar mass of polystyrene.
2. What is the osmotic pressure, in atm, of a 0.30 M solution of glucose in water that
is used for intravenous infusion at body temperature, 37°C?
1.9.4 Colligative Properties of Electrolytic Solutions
Activity 1.14
Form groups and discuss the following. Present the result of your discussion to the class as
a report.
1. What is the difference between electrolytes and non-electrolytes?
2. How do the effects of the presence of electrolyte solute on the properties of pure
solvent differ from the effect of the presence of non-electrolyte solvent? Justify your
answer by giving example.
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
60
The effective number of moles of ions produced by one mole of a solute is expressed in
terms of the Van’t Hoff factor (i).
i = 
Measured value for electrolyte solution
Expected value for nonelectrolyte solution
Thus, i is 1 for all solutions of nonelectrolytes, but is greater than 1 for solutions of electrolytes.
Therefore, the colligative-property relationship should be modified to account for dissociation
of electrolyte solutes. Consequently,
DP = i x2P°
1
DTb = i Kbm
DTf
 = i Kf
m
p = i MRT
 Table 1.3 Experimental values of the Van’t Hoff factor for some substances.
Compound 0.100 m 0.001 m
HCl 1.9 2.0
NaCl 1.87 1.97
MgSO4 1.21 1.82
K2SO4 2.32 2.84
KBr 1.88 1.97
As can be seen in Table 1.3 the experimental Van’t Hoff factors are less than the theoretical
prediction. This is mainly due to the cation-anion interaction in the solution of the electrolytes
that prevents complete dissociation.
Example 1.25
If a 0.10 m MgSO4
 solution causes an elevation of 0.062°C in the boiling point of
water, what is:
a the Van’t Hoff Factor (i)?
b the boiling point of this solution?
Solution:
a First, we find i by applying the modified colligative-property relationship for
DTb
.
DTb = i Kbm
SOLUTIONS (UNIT 1)
61
Given:
DTb = 0.062°C
2 Kb, H O = 0.512°C/m
m = 0.1 m
0.062°C = i × 0.512°C /m × 0.1 m
i = 1.21. What does this indicate?
b Recall that DTb = Tb – T°
b
0.062°C = Tb – 100°C
Tb = 100°C + 0.062°C = 100.062°C
Exercise 1.18
A 0.0622 m solution of iron (III) chloride, FeCl3, in water freezes at –0.412°C.
Determine the Van’t Hoff’s factor of FeCl3
 in this solution.
Unit Summary
• Solutions are homogeneous mixtures of two or more substances.
• Solubility depends on the relative magnitude of solute-solute, solute-solvent,
and solvent-solvent attractive forces.
• The relative amounts of solute and solvent in a solution can be described
quantitatively in terms of mass percentage, parts per million, parts per billion,
mole fraction, molarity, molality and normality.
• Increasing the temperature usually increases the solubility of solids in water
and liquids in water while it decreases the solubility of gases in water.
• Raoult’s law states that the partial vapour pressure of substance A over a
solution is equal to the mole fraction of A, XA, times the vapour pressure of
pure solvent. An ideal solution obeys Raoult’s law over the entire range of
concentration. Non ideal solutions show positive or negative deviation from
Raoult’s law.
• Some physical properties of solutions are colligative, that is, they depend on
the concentration of the solute particles that are present in a given amount
CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
62
of solvent and not on their chemical identity. These are vapour pressure
lowering, boiling point elevation, freezing point depression, and osmotic
pressure.
• The Van’t Hoff factor provides a measure of the extent of dissociation of
electrolyte in solution