There are 113 elements known at present. 92 elements occur in nature, while the rest
are man-made. All the materials on the earth are made of the naturally occurring
elements. The elements are classified as metals, non-metals and metalloids.
A solid substance that occurs naturally in the earth's crust is called mineral. All
minerals are not suitable for the extraction of elements. Minerals from which elements
can be extracted easily and economically are called ores. Thus, all ores are minerals,
but all minerals are not ores, because a mineral may not contain sufficient percentage
of an element for economic extraction. In economic extraction, the cost of obtaining
the element out of the ore is significantly less than the amount of money to be made
by selling the element.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
222
5.1.1 Occurrence of Elements
Try to find out:
a various gaseous elements around you;
b different metallic elements in your home and school;
c physical states in which the elements exist; and
d different non-metallic elements present in your body.
Make a list of metallic elements which you come across in your daily life, and discuss their
importance with your friends.
Are all elements found free in nature?
The twelve most abundant elements that constitute 99.7% by mass of the earth's crust
are, in decreasing order of abundance: oxygen (O), silicon (Si), aluminium (Al), iron
(Fe), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), sodium (Na), potassium (K), titanium (Ti),
hydrogen (H), phosphorous (P), and manganese (Mn).
•
•
•
Oxygen (45.5%)
Silicon (27.2%)
•
•
Aluminium (8.3%)
Iron (6.2%)
Calcium (4.7%)
• All others (5.3%)
Figure 5.1 Abundance of elements in the Earth's crust.
The earth’s atmosphere contains mainly nitrogen (78%), oxygen (21%), argon, carbon
dioxide, and other trace gases.
Activity 5.1
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
223
Very few elements exist in the free or native state. The most unreactive metals, i.e.,
those that are not affected by air and water, such as silver, gold, platinum, palladium,
ruthenium and osmium, are generally found in the native state. Most metals, however,
occur in combined form as compounds such as oxides, carbonates, sulphides,
sulphates, silicates, chlorides, nitrates and phosphates etc. A variety of physical and
chemical methods can be applied to separate the pure forms of elements from their
ores. However, the financial cost of mining, separating and purifying an element is the
major consideration before a process is chosen for implementation.
Metals at the top of the reactivity series (K, Na, Ca, Mg, and Al) are so reactive that
they are never found in nature as free elements. The metals in the middle of the
reactivity series (Zn, Fe, Sn, and Pb) are moderately reactive and also exist in the
combined state. Copper and silver are the two metals that occur in free as well as in
combined states, such as as sulphide, oxide or halide ores.
Table 5.1 Reactivity series of elements (the most reactive is at the top and
the least reactive is at the bottom).
Elements Symbol
Potassium K
Sodium Na
Lithium Li
Calcium Ca
Magnesium Mg
Aluminium Al
Carbon C
Zinc Zn
Iron Fe
Tin Sn
Lead Pb
Hydrogen H
Copper Cu
Silver Ag
Gold Au
Platinum Pt
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
224
Table 5.2 Main type of minerals.
Type Minerals
Uncombined metals Ag, Au, Cu, Pd, Pt, Ru, Os
Carbonates BaCO3 (witherite), CaCO3
(calcite, limestone), MgCO3
(magnesite), CaCO3.MgCO3
(dolomite),
Halides CaF2 (fluorite), NaCl (halite),
KCl (sylvine or silvite),
Na3AlF6 (cryolite)
Oxides Al2O3.2H2O (bauxite), Al2O3
(corundum), Fe2O3 (hematite),
Fe3O4 (magnetite), Cu2O
(cuprite), SnO2 (Cassiterite),
TiO2 (rutile), ZnO (zincite).
Phosphates Ca3(PO4)
2 (phosphate rock),
Ca5(PO4)
3OH (hydroxylapatite)
Sulphides Ag2S (argentite), CdS
(greenockite), Cu2S
(chalcocite), FeS2 (pyrites),
HgS(cinnaber), PbS (galena),
ZnS (sphalerite)
Sulphates BaSO4 (barite), CaSO4
(anhydrite), PbSO4 (anglesite),
CaSO4 . 2H2O (gypsum),
MgSO4 . 7H2O (epsomite)
Exercise 5.1
1. Explain why some elements exist free in nature while others exist in the form of
compounds.
2. List, in order, the six most abundant elements in the earth’s crust and classify
them as metals, non-metals and metalloids.
3. What is the distinction between a mineral and an ore?
4. Write the names of the minerals containing:
a PbS e Fe2O3
b FeS2 d HgS
c MgSO4.7H2O f CaCO3.MgCO3
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
225
5.1.2 The Recycling of Elements in Nature
How do elements recycle in nature?
Living organisms interact with the environment. The key part of this interaction is the
cycling of nutrients in the ecosystem.
An ecosystem consists of all organisms living in a community as well as the abiotic
(non-living) factors with which they interact.
Nutrients provide substances to organisms that help them to grow, but nutrients can
be very limited in the environment. It is through this exchange of necessary elements
between the living and non-living world that sustains life. The major cycles that you
will study are the carbon cycle, nitrogen cycle and phosphorus cycle. Note that the
law of conservation of mass is obeyed in the recycling of substances.
Form a group, and discuss the following question. After the discussion, share your ideas
with your classmates.
 What are the impacts of afforestation, deforestation and the building of large numbers of
cement factories, on global warming?
1. The Carbon Cycle
The Earth’s atmosphere contains 0.035% carbon dioxide (CO2), and the biological
environment depends upon plants to convert carbon dioxide into sugars, proteins and
fats.
As shown in Figure 5.2, green plants convert atmospheric carbon dioxide and water
into glucose and oxygen in a process called photosynthesis.
6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l) → C6H12O6 (aq) + 6O2(g); ∆H = +2803 kJ mol–1
Photosynthesis is an endothermic reaction. Solar energy from the sun provides the
necessary energy for the above reaction to proceed.
Animals (including humans) eat plants, or eat other animals that have eaten plants, and
incorporate the plants’ carbon atoms into their cells.
Carbon returns to the physical environment in a number of ways. Both plants and
animals respire, and they release carbon dioxide during respiration.
C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(g) → 6CO2(g) + 6H2O(l); ∆H = –2803 kJ mol–1
Activity 5.2
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
226
Respiration is an exothermic reaction, releasing 2803 kJ/mol of energy.
The process of decomposition of organic matter also releases carbon dioxide back
into the atmosphere.
Over a very long period of time, dead organisms under high pressure and in the
absence of air can be converted into fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas. Humans
combust these fossil fuels as energy sources which releases carbon dioxide back into
the atmosphere. The complete combustion of coal, oil, or natural gas results in the
formation of carbon dioxide gas:
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g)
The combustion of fossil fuels is exothermic, and therefore, releases energy in the form
of heat.
According to law of conservation of mass, the total number of carbon atoms (in the
atmosphere) is always constant; but there is a growing concern over the amount of
carbon that exists as carbon dioxide, because carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas and
is a major contributor to global warming.
Food
CO (aq) in oceans 2
carbon in shells
and limestone
Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
Combustion of
fossil fuels
Glucose in
green plants
Photosynthesis
Fossil Fuels
oil, coal & gas
High pressure
Decaying plants
and animals no air
Respiration
Figure 5.2 Carbon cycle.
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
227
Exercise 5.2
1. a Discuss how green plants and animals incorporate carbon atoms from
atmospheric carbon dioxide gas.
b Describe how carbon returns to the atmosphere.
2. One of the possible consequences of global warming is an increase in the
temperature of ocean water. The oceans serve as a “sink” for CO2 by
dissolving a large amount of the substance. How would the solubility of CO2
in the oceans be affected by an increase in the temperature of water?
In your group, discuss each of the following questions. After the discussion, share your
ideas with the rest of the class.
1. Why are fertilisers like urea and diammonium monohydrogen phosphate extensively
used in agriculture?
2. What role do the nitrogen-fixing bacteria play in legumes in the nitrogen cycle?
2. The Nitrogen Cycle
Proteins and nucleic acids contain nitrogen, so nitrogen is a very important atom in
biological organisms. Nitrogen makes up 78% of the earth’s atmosphere, but most
organisms cannot use nitrogen (N2). This is because the N≡N triple bond has large
dissociation energy (945 kJ mol–1), and N2 is quite inert.
Nitrogen fixation refers to the conversion of nitrogen gas into nitrogen compounds.
Natural fixation reactions can be initiated by lightning, which breaks nitrogen molecules
and enables their atoms to combine with oxygen in the air, forming nitrogen oxides.
These compounds are then washed into the soil by rain.
Bacteria found in nodules in the roots of leguminous plants, such as beans, lentils, and
peas, can convert atmospheric nitrogen gas into nitrates (NO3
– ), which plants use to
make plant proteins. Generally, soluble nitrogen compounds in the soil can be taken
up by plants to make plant proteins.
Animals eat plants and convert plant proteins into animal proteins. Animals excrete
nitrogenous wastes, partially as urea or uric acid, which is returned to the soil.
Activity 5.3
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
228
Industrial chemical processes involving the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen include the
Haber’s process for the manufacture of ammonia, and the formation of calcium
cyanamide, which involves the use of high temperatures and pressures. Bacteria can
fix atmospheric nitrogen easily at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, yet
man requires expensive industrial plants with high temperatures and pressures to do
the same thing.
Once atmospheric nitrogen is fixed by chemical industries, it can be converted to
nitrogen-containing fertilisers, which can be used by plants for their metabolism.
When plants and animals die, specialized decomposing bacteria will start to convert
them back into ammonia and water-soluble ammonium salts. After the nutrients are
converted back into ammonia, anaerobic bacteria will convert it back into nitrogen
gas. This process is known as denitrification.
Nitrite
ions
Remains of dead
plants and animals
Nitrifying
bacteria
Ammonium
ions
Nitrate
ions
Leached to
ground water
Nitrifying
bacteria
Nitrogen fixation
by vehicles
NO
Nitrogen fixation
bacteria in root nodules
Plant use nitrates and
ammonium ions in soil
to make amino acids
Animals eat plants
Nitrogen fixation by
fertilizer factoty
Nitrogen fixation
by lightning
NO
NO2
Atmospheric Nitrogen
Figure 5.3 Nitrogen cycle.
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
229
Exercise 5.3
1. For what purpose do plants and animals need nitrogen?
2. Why is atmospheric nitrogen less reactive?
3. What is the difference between nitrogen fixation and denitrification? Use examples
to explain your answer.
4. How is nitrogen fixed naturally and synthetically?
3. The Phosphorus Cycle
The phosphorus cycle differs from the nitrogen and carbon cycles primarily in that
phosphorus is not found in the atmosphere in the gaseous state.
Phosphorus is mainly found in water, soil and sediments. It is an essential nutrient for
plants and animals in the form of PO4
3– and HPO4
2 – ions. It is part of DNA (deoxyribo
nucleic acid) molecules, molecules that store energy-rich ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
and fats of cell membranes. Phosphorus is a building block of certain parts of the human
and animal body, such as bones and teeth.
Phosphate salts are released when phosphate rocks are eroded by rainfall, weathering
and runoff. The release of phosphate salts into the soil results in a constant phosphorus
supply for plants. Phosphate salts are absorbed through the roots of plants and are used
to make organic compounds. Animals absorb phosphates by eating plants or planteating animals. When plants and animals die, they decompose and return phosphorus
into the soil or water and complete the cycle.
In comparison to the nitrogen and carbon cycles, the rate at which phosphate salts are
released is extremely slow. Phosphorus can remain in rocks or sediments for millions of
years. As a result, the need of phosphate salts for plant growth outweighs the amount
of phosphate salts being released. To alleviate the phosphate demand, the addition of
phosphate fertilisers has been devised by humans to maintain and increase crop
production.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
230
3 Plants 4 Animals
1 Weathering
phosphate
from rocks
2 Phosphate Phosphate in soil in soil
5 Phosphorus as
a waste products
Phosphorus as
a waste products
Figure 5.4 Phosphorus cycle.
Exercise 5.4
1. What are the effects of using phosphate fertilisers on the environment?
2. What makes the phosphorus cycle different from the carbon and nitrogen
cycles?
3. What are the major uses of phosphorus in living organism?
5.2 Some Elements in Industry
After completing this subunit, you will be able to:
• define metallurgy;
• explain the major steps in metallurgical processes;
• describe the manufacture of sodium by Down’s cells;
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
231
• explain the chemical properties of sodium;
• describe the uses of sodium;
• describe the manufacture of calcium;
• explain the chemical properties of calcium;
• describe the uses of calcium;
• describe the manufacture of tin;
• explain the chemical properties of tin;
• describe the uses of tin;
• describe the manufacture of lead;
• explain the chemical properties of lead;
• describe the uses of lead;
• describe the manufacture of zinc;
• explain the chemical properties of zinc;
• describe the uses of zinc;
• describe the manufacture of chromium;
• explain the chemical properties of chromium;
• describe the uses of chromium;
• describe the production of silicon;
• explain the chemical properties of silicon;
• describe the uses of silicon;
• explain the steps in the Haber process in the industrial production of ammonia
and describe the uses of ammonia;
• explain the steps in the Ostwald’s process in the industrial production of nitric
acid and describe the uses of nitric acid;
• explain the steps in the Contact process in the industrial production of sulphuric
acid and describe the uses of sulphuric acid; and
• explain the steps in the industrial production of diammonium monohydrogen
phosphate and describe its uses.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
232
Discuss each of the following questions in your group; after the discussion, share your
ideas with the rest of the class.
1. How are metals extracted from their ores?
2. What property determines the application of chemical or electrolytic reduction?
3. Why are some elements extracted by electrolysis and others by chemical reduction?
Give examples for each type.
5.2.1 Metallurgy
Metallurgy is the science and technology of extracting metals from their natural
sources and preparing them for practical use.
The principal steps that are carried out to obtain a metal from its ore are:
concentrating the ore, pre-treatment, extracting the metal and refining (purifying) the
crude metal.
1. Concentrating the Ore
What physical and chemical methods are employed to concentrate an ore?
Concentrating an ore increases the fraction of metal-bearing ore by eliminating most of
the accompanying rock and soil, called gangue. A gangue is undesired material or
impurity, which is found together with the ore.
The ore must first be finely divided by crushing and grinding, and then the gangue can
be removed in a number of ways.
i) Gravity Separation
Gravity separation depends on the difference in density between the mineral and the
gangue. For example, since gold has a very large density (19.3 g/mL), it can be
separated from its gangue by this method.
ii) Magnetic Separation
Magnetic separation can be used for separating ferromagnetic minerals from their
impurities.
For example, the mineral magnetite (Fe3
O4
) can be separated from gangue by using a
strong electromagnet.
Activity 5.4
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
233
iii) Froth Floatation
In this process, the ore is finely ground and added to water containing oil and
detergent. Because of the differences in the surface characteristics of mineral particles
and the silicate rock particles, the oil wets only the mineral particles. A stream of air
blown through the mixture causes tiny bubbles to form on the oil-covered pieces,
which then float to the surface in the form of froth or foam, while the gangue settles to
the bottom. The froth is skimmed off, allowed to collapse, and then is dried to
recover the mineral particles. For example, sulphide ores are concentrated by froth
flotation.
iv) Amalgamation
An amalgam is an alloy of mercury with another metal or metals.
How are metals recovered from an amalgam?
Mercury forms amalgams with a number of metals and can be used to extract these
metals from their ores. For example, mercury dissolves silver and gold in an ore to
form a liquid amalgam, which is easily separated from the remaining ore. The gold or
silver is recovered by distilling off the mercury.
v) Leaching
How does leaching differ from other methods of concentrating ore?
The methods we have seen so far are physical methods of concentrating ore. In
contrast, leaching is a chemical process of concentrating ore. In this method, the ore is
treated with a reagent that dissolves the target substance, leaving the impurities
undissolved. For example, aluminium oxide, Al2O3, is separated from bauxite
(Al2O3
.2H2O) and oxides of iron and silicon impurities. When the crushed ore is
treated with hot 30% aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide, the amphoteric aluminium
oxide dissolves.
Al2O3(s) + 2NaOH (aq 30%) + 3H2O 150 C to 220 C
 ° ° → 2Na+(aq) + 2Al(OH)4
–(aq)
Why is aluminium oxide soluble in excess strong bases like NaOH?
Iron oxide and other basic oxides are not affected by the base, and the silicate
impurities are converted to insoluble aluminosilicates. The solution is filtered, cooled,
and diluted to reduce the OH– concentration. Aluminium hydroxide then precipitates
and the anhydrous oxide is obtained by heating.
Al(OH)4
– (aq) —→ Al(OH)3(s) + OH– (aq)
2Al(OH)3(s) heat
→ Al2O3
(s) + 3H2O(g)
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
234
Gold is sometimes found in ores in the elemental state, but it usually occurs in
relatively small concentrations. A process called cyanidation treats the crushed ore
with an aqueous cyanide solution in the presence of air. This process dissolves the
gold by forming the complex ion Au(CN)2
–
.
4Au(s) + 8CN–(aq) + O2(g) + 2H2O(l) —→ 4Au(CN)2
– (aq) + 4OH–(aq)
Pure gold is then recovered by reacting the solution of Au(CN)2
– with zinc powder to
reduce Au+ in the complex to Au.
2Au(CN)2
–(aq) + Zn(s) —→ 2Au(s) + Zn(CN)4
– (aq)
Discuss the following in your group; after the discussion, share your ideas with the rest of
the class.
1. Which elements can form amalgam with mercury?
2. Can non-metals form amalgam; if not why?
3. What are the uses of amalgams in our daily life?
Exercise 5.5
1. Define metallurgy.
2. Describe and give an example of each of the following methods of
concentrating ores.
a Gravity separation d Amalgamation
b Magnetic separation e Leaching
c Froth flotation
2. Pre-treatment
Pre-treatment converts a mineral to a form that is easy to reduce. For example,
sulfides are converted to reducible oxides by heating them in dry air, a process called
roasting:
2PbS(s) + 3O2(g) heat
→ 2PbO(s) + 2SO2(g)
Activity 5.5
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
235
If a metal is to be obtained by electrolytic reduction, its oxide, hydroxide, or
carbonate is often treated with HCl to convert it to chloride. Chlorides are preferred
for electrolytic reductions because they usually melt at low temperatures, except for
aluminium chloride, to form conductive liquids. Molten aluminium chloride is a poor
conductor of electricity. This pre-treatment method is used in the Dow process for
obtaining magnesium metal from seawater.
Seawater contains about 1.3 g of magnesium ions per litre. These ions are first
precipitated as magnesium hydroxide and then converted to magnesium chloride.
The chemical equations are:
CaCO3(s) heat
→ CaO(s) + CO2(g) Lime
CaO(s) + H2O(l) —→ Ca(OH)2(aq)
 Saturated solution
Mg2+(aq) + Ca(OH)2(aq) —→ Mg(OH)2(s) + Ca2+(aq)
 Seawater
The magnesium hydroxide is filtered and converted to magnesium chloride with HCl.
Mg(OH)2(s) + 2HCl(aq) —→ MgCl2(aq) + 2H2O(l)
Pure MgCl2, for electrolysis, is recovered by evaporating the water.
3. Production of Metals
By what methods are metals extracted from their pre-treated ores?
Because metals in their combined form always have positive oxidation numbers, the
production of a free metal usually involves a reduction process. How a particular pure
metal is obtained by reduction from its combined form depends on the standard
reduction potential of the metal. The production of metals by reduction may be
accomplished either chemically or electrolytically.
a Chemical Reduction
A more electropositive metal can be used as a reducing agent to separate a less
electropositive metal from its compound at high temperatures.
For example:
V2O5(s) + 5Ca(l) —→ 2V(l) + 5CaO(s)
TiCl4(s) + 2Mg(l) —→ Ti(s) + 2MgCl2(l)
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
236
Cr2O3(s) + 2Al(s) —→ 2Cr(l) + Al2O3(s)
The less electropositive metals like copper, tin, lead, zinc, manganese, cobalt, nickel
and iron are obtained by reducing their oxides with coke (carbon) at high
temperature.
ZnO(s) + C(s) heat
→ Zn(l) + CO(g)
Carbon is used as a reducing agent because it is readily available and is cheap.
However, it can not be used to reduce all the metal oxides.
Hydrogen may also be used to reduce metals that are lower than itself in the reactivity
series. But since hydrogen is more expensive than carbon, it is only used on a large
scale for the extraction of tungsten because this process avoids the formation of
tungsten carbide.
WO3(s) + 3H2(g) —→ W(s) + 3H2O(g)
b Electrolytic Reduction
How can we prepare metals by electrolysis?
Electrolytic reduction is suitable for highly electropositive metals, such as sodium,
magnesium and aluminium. Aluminium is extracted by the electrolysis of molten
aluminium oxide (Al2O3) with cryolite (Na3AlF6). Cryolite is added to aluminium
oxide to enhance electrical conductivity and to lower the melting point. However, the
many metals are extracted by the electrolysis of anhydrous molten halides. At the
cathode, metal ions are reduced and at the anode, anions are oxidized.
4. Refining and Alloying
Metals prepared by reduction usually need further treatment to remove impurities. The
extent of purification, of course, depends on how the metal will be used. The three
common purification procedures are distillation, electrolysis, and zone refining.
a Distillation
What kind of metals can be separated by distillation?
Metals that have low boiling points, such as mercury, magnesium, and zinc, can be
separated from other metals by fractional distillation.
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
237
b Electrolysis
Electrolysis is another important purification technique. For example, the copper metal
obtained by roasting copper sulphide usually contains impurities such as zinc, iron,
silver, and gold. The more electropositive metals are removed by an electrolysis
process in which the impure copper acts as anode and pure copper acts as the
cathode. (Refer to the electrolysis of copper sulphate, using copper electrodes, in
Unit 4).
c Zone Refining
Another method of obtaining pure metals is zone refining. In this process, a metal rod
containing a few impurities is drawn through an electrical heating coil that melts the
metal in the metal rod. Most impurities dissolve in the molten metal. As the metal rod
comes out from the heating coil, it cools and the pure metal crystallizes, leaving the
impurities in the molten metal portion that is still in the heating coil.
Purification of the metal occurs because as the crystal reforms, the metal ions are
likely to fit much better in the crystal lattice than are atoms of impurities. Several
repetitions of this process give a very pure metal.
High purity of metals is not always required, because pure metals possess undesirable
properties for most practical applications. For instance, as you learned in Unit 4, iron
deteriorates by corrosion. Therefore, iron is generally more useful when it is alloyed or
coated with other metals.
To make alloys, metals are melted together to form a molten solution, and the solution
is cooled to the solid state. The resulting alloy possesses the same general
characteristics as the parent metals. However, because the alloy is a mixture in the
form of a solid solutions, it is stronger than its parent metals.
Form a group. Discuss the following questions in your group. After the discussion,
share your ideas with the rest of class.
1. Make a list of various elements present in sea water and river water.
2. Are carbonates and bicarbonates also present in sea water?
3. Which elements are economically recovered from sea water by electrolysis?
Activity 5.6
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
238
Exercise 5.6
1. Discuss the main steps in obtaining a pure metal from its ore.
2. What is meant by pre-treatment of an ore? Give some examples of pretreatment.
3. Describe, with examples, the chemical and electrolytic reduction processes
used in the production of metals.
4. Describe the process by which a metal is purified by zone refining.
5. A copper sample containing gold, lead, silver, and zinc as impurities, is refined
electrolytically using a copper sulphate as electrolyte. Use Table 4.2 and state
which substances will be found in the anode sludge.
5.2.2 Extraction, Properties and Uses of Some
Selected Metals
1. Sodium
Form a group. Discuss the following questions in your group. After the discussion,
share your ideas with the rest of class.
1. What are the main ores of sodium?
2. Which of the ores you listed in question (1) are found in Lake Afdera and Lake
Abiyata?
3. Which regions in Ethiopia are the potential sources of table salt?
4. Why is sodium metal kept under kerosene or paraffin oil?
5. For the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride, write a balanced chemical equation for:
a anode reaction b cathode reaction c overall reaction
Extraction of Sodium
How is sodium metal extracted from sodium chloride?
Sodium is a very reactive metal and is not found free in nature. It exists in the form of
compounds. It is a strong reducing agent and cannot be reduced by carbon. Sodium
is obtained by the electrolysis of a molten mixture of about 40% NaCl and 60%
CaCl2 in a Downs cell as shown in Figure 5.5. Calcium chloride (CaCl2) is added to
lower the melting point of NaCl from 800°C to 600°C.
Activity 5.7
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
239
The sodium metal formed at the cathode is in liquid state. Because sodium metal is
less dense than molten NaCl, the sodium floats to the surface and is collected.
Chlorine gas forms at the anode and is collected at the top of the Downs cell.
Cl outlet 2
Inlet for NaCl
Molten NaCl
Liquid Na
metal
Na
outlet
Anode (+)
Cathode (–)
Figure 5.5 Downs cell for electrolysis of molten NaCl.
Chemical Properties of Sodium
a Reaction with water
Sodium reacts with water, liberating hydrogen and forming sodium hydroxide solution.
2Na(s) + 2H2O(l) —→ 2NaOH(aq) + H2(g)
b Reaction with air
Sodium tarnishes readily in dry air to form sodium peroxide and sodium oxide.
6Na(s) + 2O2(g) —→ Na2O2(s) + 2Na2O(s)
 major product minor product
c Reaction with hydrogen
Sodium reacts with hydrogen to form sodium hydride.
2Na(s) + H2(g) —→ 2NaH(s)
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
240
d Reaction with halogens (F2, Cl2, Br2 and I2)
Sodium reacts with halogens to form sodium halides.
2Na(s) + F2(g) —→ 2NaF(s)
Uses of Sodium
The largest use of sodium is to make a Na/Pb alloy needed to make tetraethyl lead
(PbEt4) and tetramethyl lead (PbMe4). These compounds are used as anti-knock
additives to petrol. Another important use is to reduce TiCl4
 and ZnCl4
 to the metals.
Liquid sodium metal is used as a coolant in nuclear reactors. It is also used to make
Na2
O2
 and NaH, and for street lights.
Exercise 5.7
1. Write the chemical formulas of the following ore:
a borax b trona c rock salt
2. Why is calcium chloride added in the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride?
3. Assume that a piece of sodium catches a fire in the laboratory. Why shouldn't
you try to extinguish with water?
4. Write balanced chemical reactions for the reaction of sodium with:
a chlorine b bromine c iodine
5. State the uses of sodium metal.
2. Calcium
Occurrence of Calcium
Calcium is the 5th most abundant element in the earth’s crust. The main ores of
calcium are: limestone, chalk, and marble (CaCO3), dolomite (CaCO3.MgCO3),
gypsum (CaSO4.2H2O), fluorite (CaF2), and hydroxylapatite, Ca5(PO4)
3OH. In
Ethiopia, gypsum deposits are found in the Danakil depression.
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
241
Extraction of Calcium
Explain why sodium and calcium cannot be extracted by using carbon as a
reducing agent?
Calcium is prepared by the electrolysis of molten calcium chloride (CaCl2).
Anode (oxidation) : 2Cl–(l) —→ Cl2(g) + 2e–
Cathode (reduction) : Ca2+(l) + 2e– —→ Ca(l)
Overall reaction : Ca2+(l) + 2Cl–(l) —→ Ca(l) + Cl2(g)
Calcium can also be prepared by the reduction of CaO by aluminium in vacuum,
where the calcium produced distills off.
Based on the above information, write an equation that shows the reaction
between calcium oxide and aluminium metal.
Chemical properties of Calcium
a Reaction with water
Calcium reacts with cold water quite readily, liberating hydrogen gas and forming
calcium hydroxide.
Ca(s) + 2H2O(l) —→ Ca(OH)2(aq) + H2(g)
b Reaction with oxygen
Calcium reacts with oxygen to form calcium oxide.
2Ca(s) + O2(g) —→ 2CaO(s)
c Reaction with nitrogen
Calcium reacts with nitrogen at high temperatures to form calcium nitride.
3Ca(s) + N2(g) high temperature
→ Ca3N2(s)
d Reaction with halogens
Calcium reacts with F2, Cl2, Br2 and I
2 to form CaF2, CaCl2, CaBr2 and CaI2
respectively.
Ca(s) + F2(g) —→ CaF2(s)
e Reaction with hydrogen
Calcium combines with hydrogen to form calcium hydride.
Ca(s) + H2(g) —→ CaH2(s)
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
242
Uses of Calcium
Calcium is an essential element in living matter. It is the major component of bones
and teeth. A characteristic function of Ca2+ ions in living systems is in the activation of
a variety of metabolic processes. For example, calcium plays a vital role in heart
action, blood clotting, muscle contraction, and nerve-impulse transmission.
Exercise 5.8
1. List the common ores of calcium.
2. When exposed to air, calcium first forms calcium oxide, which is then
converted to calcium hydroxide, and finally to calcium carbonate. Write a
balanced chemical equation for each step.
3. Write a balanced chemical equation to show the reaction between calcium and:
a chlorine c iodine
b bromine d nitrogen
4. Describe the uses of calcium metal.
3. Tin
Occurrence
The only important ore of tin is cassiterite, SnO2
.
Extraction of Tin
Refer to chemistry books available in your school library, or to any other sources, and write
a report how tin occurs in nature and how it is extracted from cassiterite. After discussing
it with your teacher, present your report to the class.
Chemical Properties of Tin
a Reaction with water
Tin does not react with cold water, but it reacts with steam to form SnO2 and H2.
Sn(s) + 2H2O(g) heat
→ SnO2(s) + 2H2(g)
Activity 5.8
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
243
b Reaction with acids
Tin reacts with dilute and concentrated acids.
Sn(s) + dil. 2HCl(aq) —→ SnCl2(aq) + H2 (g)
Sn(s) + conc. 4HNO3(aq) —→ Sn(NO3)
2(aq) + 2NO2(g) + 2H2O(l)
c Reaction with halogens
Tin reacts with Cl2 and Br2
 in the cold and with F2 and I
2 on warming, forming the
corresponding tin tetrahalide.
Sn(s) + 2Cl2(g) cold
→ SnCl4(s)
Sn(s) + 2F2 (g) warm
→ SnF4(s)
Uses of Tin
The main uses of tin are for electroplating steel, to make tin-plate, and alloys. Tinplate is extensively used for making cans for food. Tin is a constituent of many alloys,
including type metal (Sn, Sb and Pb), bronze (Sn and Cu), and solder (Sn and Pb).
Exercise 5.9
1. Write balanced chemical equation to show the extraction of tin from cassiterite.
2. Write the reactions of tin with steam and dilute HNO3
.
3. Write the reactions of tin with chlorine, bromine and iodine.
4. Describe the uses of tin metal.
4. Lead
Occurrence of Lead
The main ore of lead is galena, PbS. It is black, shiny and very dense.
Extraction of Lead
Galena is mined and separated from its impurities by froth flotation. There are two
methods of extracting the element:
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
244
According to first method, the ore is roasted in air to give PbO, which is then
reduced with coke or carbon monoxide in a furnace.
2PbS(s) + 3O2(g) → 2PbO(s) + 2SO2(g)
2PbO(s) + C(s) ∆
→ 2Pb(l) + CO2(g)
In second method, PbS is partially oxidized by heating and blowing air through it.
After some time the air is turned off and heating is continued, and the mixture
undergoes self–reduction.
3PbS(s) + O2(g) heated in air
→PbS(s) + 2PbO(s) heated in absence  of air →3Pb(l) + SO2(g)
Chemical Properties of Lead
Lead is not affected by water because the metal is covered by a thin oxide film. It
dissolves slowly in dilute HCl, forming the sparingly soluble PbCl2 and quite readily in
dilute HNO3, forming Pb(NO3)2 and oxides of nitrogen. However, it does not
dissolve in dilute H2SO4 because a surface coating of PbSO4 is formed. Lead is
slowly attacked by cold alkali, and rapidly by hot alkali, giving the plumbates
Na2Pb(OH)6. Thus, lead is amphoteric. It also reacts with F2 in the cold, forming
PbF2
, and with Cl2
 on heating, giving PbCl2
.
Uses of Lead
The major use of lead is to make lead-acid storage batteries. It is also used in the
manufacture of PbEt4
 as an additive for petrol, in paints and pigments. In addition,
lead is used for the production of lead sheets, lead pipes and solder.
Exercise 5.10
1. Show the extraction of lead from galena, using chemical equations.
2. Write balanced chemical equations to show the reaction between lead and
a H2O b HCl c HNO3
3. Describe the uses of lead metal.
5. Zinc
Occurrence of Zinc
Zinc is the 24th most abundant element in the earth's crust. The most important ore of
zinc is zinc blende (ZnS).
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
245
Extraction of Zinc
How is zinc metal extracted from zinc blende?
ZnS is concentrated by froth flotation and then roasted in air to give ZnO and SO2.
The SO2 is used to make H2SO4. Zn is extracted from the oxide by two different
processes.
1. ZnO may be reduced by carbon monoxide at 1200°C
ZnO(s) + CO(g) —→ Zn(g) + CO2(g)
2. ZnS is heated in air at a lower temperature, yielding ZnO and ZnSO4. These are
dissolved in H2SO4. Zinc dust is added to precipitate Cd, and then the ZnSO4
solution is electrolyzed to give pure zinc. This method is more expensive than the first.
Chemical Properties of Zinc
Zinc is a silvery solid that tarnishes rapidly in moist air. It dissolves in dilute HCl and
liberates hydrogen gas.
Zn(s) + HCl(aq) —→ ZnCl2(aq) + H2(g)
Zinc also reacts with aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide and forms sodium zincate,
Na2Zn(OH)4. Hence, zinc shows amphoteric properties.
On heating, it reacts with oxygen to form zinc oxide.
2Zn(s) + O2(g) heating
→ 2ZnO(s)
Uses of Zinc
Zinc is used in large amounts for coating iron to prevent it from rusting. A thin coating
of zinc may be applied electrolytically. This process is called galvanizing. A thicker
layer may be applied by dipping a metal in molten zinc. Large amounts of Zn are used
to make alloys. The most common alloy is brass, which is an alloy of copper and
zinc.
Can you list the other alloys of zinc?
Zinc is also used as the negative electrode (anode) in sealed 'dry' batteries such as Le
clanche’ cells, mercury cells and alkaline manganese cells. Zinc oxide is sometimes
used as a white pigment in paint. It is particularly bright as it absorbs UV light and reemits it as white light.
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
246
Exercise 5.11
1. Describe the extraction of zinc from zinc blende.
2. Explain the amphoteric properties of zinc.
3. State the uses of zinc metal.
 Experiment 5.1
Studying Chemical Properties of Some Metals
Objective: To study some chemical properties of sodium, calcium, lead, tin and
zinc metals.
Chemicals: Na, Ca, Sn, Pb, and Zn metals; 2 M HCl, water.
Apparatus: Test tubes and beakers.
1. Reaction of cold water with sodium
Take about 5 mL of water in a test tube and place a small piece of sodium
metal to the water. Check the basicity of the solution using litmus paper.
2. Reaction of cold water with calcium
Take about 50 mL of water in a beaker and add a small piece of calcium
metal in the water. Check the basicity of the solution by using litmus paper.
3. Reaction of tin, lead and zinc with 2M HCl
Place 1 mL of 2M HCl in three test tubes and then add a small piece of tin
metal in the first test tube, lead metal in the second test tube, and zinc metal in
the third test tube. What do you observe?
Results and Discussion:
1. What is the gas liberated? How do you confirm it?
2. Write a chemical equation that shows:
a the burning of hydrogen gas.
b the reaction between zinc and dilute hydrochloric acid.
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
247
6. Chromium
Occurrence
Chromium is the 21st most abundant element, by weight, in the Earth's crust. The
most important ore of chromium is chromite (FeCr2
O4
).
Extraction
Chromium is produced in two forms which are ferrochrome and pure chromium metal.
Ferrochrome is mainly an alloy of chromium and iron. It is prepared by reducing
chromite with carbon.
FeCr2O4(s) + 4C(s) electric furnance → Fe + 2Cr + 4CO
 ferrochrome
Four basic steps are followed to get pure chromium.
Step 1: When chromite is fused with NaOH in air, chromium (III) is oxidized to
chromium (VI).
4FeCr2O4(s)+16NaOH(s)+7O2(g) 1100 C
° →8Na2CrO4(s)+2Fe2O3(s)+8H2O(l)
Step 2: Ferric oxide (Fe2O3) is insoluble, but sodium chromate (Na2CrO4) is
soluble in water. Thus the sodium chromate is separated from ferric oxide
by dissolving with water, followed by decantation or filtration. The sodium
chromate solution is acidified to convert it to a less soluble sodium
dichromate.
2Na2CrO4(aq) + 2HCl(aq) —→ Na2Cr2O7(s) + 2NaCl(aq) + H2O(l)
Step 3: The sodium dichromate is reduced to Cr2
O3 by heating with carbon.
Na2Cr2O7(s) + 2C(s) —→ Cr2O3(s) + Na2CO3(s) + CO(g)
Step 4: Finally, Cr2O3 is reduced to the metal by Al.
Cr2O3(s) + 2Al(s) —→ 2Cr(s) + Al2O3(s)
Chemical Properties
Chromium is an active metal but it is protected from corrosion by a very thin
transparent oxide film.
4Cr(s) + 3O2(g) —→ 2Cr2O3(s)
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
248
Concentrated nitric acid and other oxidizing agents build up the oxide film to the point
where chromium becomes passive, that is, it no longer dissolves in the acid solution.
Chromium dissolves in HCl and dilute H2
SO4 to form blue chromium (II) ions, which
are stable only in the absence of air.
Cr(s) + 2H+(aq) —→ Cr2+(aq) + H2(g)
The unstable chromium (II) state is readily oxidized to the chromium (III) state.
It can remove traces of oxygen by bubbling the gas through a solution containing
chromium (II) ions.
4Cr2+(aq) + O2(g) + 4H+(aq) —→ 4Cr3+(aq) + 2H2O(l)
Uses
Nichrome wire, commonly used in chemistry laboratories for flame tests, is an alloy of
nickel and chromium. Ferrochrome, iron–chromium alloy, is used in the production of
stainless steel. Cr2O3 is dissolved in H2SO4 and deposited electrolytically
(electroplating) on the surface of a metal. This protects the metal from corrosion and
gives it a shiny appearance.
Sodium and potassium chromates and dichromates are used as pigments and
corrosion inhibitors in heating systems and air-conditioning systems.
Chromium (VI) oxide, CrO3, appears as a bright-red precipitate when saturated
potassium dichromate is treated with excess of concentrated sulphuric acid.
2 Cr O (aq) 2H (aq) 2CrO (s) H O(l) 2 3 7 2
− + + → +
CrO (s) H O(l) 3 2 + U H2CrO4
The resulting acid mixture (also known as chromic acid) is a powerful oxidizing agent.
It can oxidize grease and was used as a cleaning solution for laboratory glassware.
Exercise 5.12
1. Write equations for the reduction of chromite ore with carbon, and Cr2
O3
 with
aluminium.
2. Pure chromium can also be prepared from chromite by the following steps.
Write the equations for each step.
Step 1: The ore is fused with sodium carbonate in the presence of air, yielding
sodium chromate, iron (III) oxide, and carbon dioxide gas.
Step 2: The sodium chromate is converted to sodium dichromate by the addition
of acid.
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
249
Step 3: The sodium dichromate is recrystallised, dried and reduced to chromium
(III) oxide with carbon.
Step 4: The chromium (III) oxide is reduced to chromium metal with aluminium.
5.2.3 Silicon
Occurrence
Silicon is the second most abundant element, after oxygen, in the Earth's crust. It
occurs as silica (SiO2
) and silicate compounds containing the silicate ion, (SiO4
4– ).
Quartz is a pure crystalline form of silica, and flint is a hard amorphous form.
Extraction
Silicon is prepared by heating silica with coke to approximately 3000°C in an electric
furnace:
SiO2(s) + 2C(s) —→ Si(l) + 2CO(g)
The molten silicon is taken from the bottom of the furnace and allowed to cool
producing a shiny blue-gray solid.
Extremely high-purity silicon is needed for the electronics industry. Purifying raw
silicon requires additional steps. First, the silicon in the impure sample is allowed to
react with chlorine to convert the silicon to liquid silicon tetrachloride.
Si(s) + 2Cl2(g) —→ SiCl4(l)
Silicon tetrachloride (boiling point 57.6°C) is carefully purified by distillation and then
reduced to silicon, using magnesium:
SiCl4(g) + 2Mg(s) —→ 2MgCl2(s) + Si(s)
The magnesium chloride is washed out with water, and the silicon is remelted and cast
into bars. A final purification is carried out by zone refining.
Chemical Properties
Silica is resistant to attack by all acids except HF, with which it reacts to give SiF4
and H2O. This chemical attack is involved in the etching of glass. It also dissolves
slowly in hot, molten NaOH or Na2CO3 to give Na4SiO4
:
SiO2(s) + 4HF(l) —→ SiF4(g) + 2H2O(l)
SiO2(s) + 2Na2CO3(l) —→ Na4SiO4(s) + 2CO2(g)
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
250
Silicon and methyl chloride (CH3Cl) react at 300°C in the presence of copper
powder as a catalyst. The main product of this reaction is (CH3)
2SiCl2
.
Si(s) + 2CH3Cl (g) —→ (CH3)
2SiCl2(l)
When it reacts with water, initially it produces (CH3)2Si(OH)2, and the reaction
continues to form a polymer.
(CH3)2SiCl2(l) + 2H2O(l) —→ (CH3)2Si(OH)2(l) + 2HCl(g)
n(CH3)
2Si(OH)2(l) —→ [(CH3)
2SiO]n(s) + nH2O(l)
Silicone polymers are non-toxic and have good stability to heat, light, moisture, and
oxygen.
Uses
Silicon is a semiconductor and is used in the construction of transistors and
microprocessors. Quartz crystals are used to control the frequency of radio and
television transmissions. Silicone polymers are used in making lubricants, lipstick, car
polish and other materials.
Have a look at the Periodic Table of elements and make a list of various metals, which at
room temperature:
1. do not react with acids, bases or air;
2. vigorously react with water;
Form a group. Discuss the following question. After the discussion, share your ideas with
the rest of the class.
Explain why elements like tin, lead, zinc, chromium and silicon can be extracted from
their ores using carbon as a reducing agent, but sodium and calcium cannot.
Exercise 5.13
1. Describe how ultra pure silicon can be produced from silica.
2. State major uses of silicon and its compounds.
Activity 5.9
Activity 5.10
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
251
3. react with air and water, and hence are stored under kerosene; and
4. react with chlorine.
Discuss your findings with your teacher and share them with your classmates.
5.2.4 Some Important Compounds of Selected Non-metals
1. Ammonia (NH3 )
Haber, Fritz (1868-1934), was a German chemist and Nobel laureate. He is best known
for his development of an economical method of ammonia synthesis. Haber was born in
Breslau (now Wroclaw, Poland) and educated at the
Technische Hochschule in Berlin. He was appointed as
professor of physical chemistry at the University of Berlin
in 1911. Subsequently, he became director of the Kaiser
Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry in Berlin. During
World War I, Haber was chief of the German chemical
warfare service, and he directed the chlorine gas attack
at the Second Battle of Ypres. In 1933, because of antiSemitic policies in Germany, Haber resigned and went to
Switzerland, where he died the following year. Haber's
greatest achievement was his discovery, in 1913, of a
process for synthesizing ammonia by the direct
combination of nitrogen and hydrogen. The method was
adapted to commercial use in the 1930s by the German
chemist Karl Bosch. The Haber-Bosch process is used in
the manufacture of explosives and in the production of
fertilizers. Haber also made fundamental contributions to the field of electrochemistry.
He was awarded the 1918 Nobel Prize in chemistry.
Historical Note
Haber Fritz
In your group, discuss each of the following questions. After the discussion, share your
ideas with the rest of the class.
1. Write a balanced chemical equation for the formation of ammonia by Haber process.
2. What is the purpose of adding finely divided iron in the Haber process?
3. Why is ammonia highly soluble in water?
Activity 5.11
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
252
4. What conditions are required to get high yield of ammonia using Le Chatelier's
principle?
5. What conditions are required to get economically feasible yields of ammonia?
6. Discuss the uses of ammonia.
2. Nitric Acid (HNO3 )
Pure nitric acid is a colourless liquid, but on exposure to light it turns brown because
of slight decomposition into NO2 (brown) and O2.
4HNO3(l) —→ 4NO2(g) + O2(g) + 2H2O(l)
 brown
Nitric acid is a strong acid and dissociates completely to give H3O+ and NO3
– in
dilute aqueous solution.
Nitric acid forms a large number of salts, called nitrates, which are typically very
soluble in water.
Nitric acid is a strong oxidizing agent, particularly when it is hot and concentrated.
Nitric acid is produced industrially from ammonia by the three-step Ostwald process:
Step 1: Ammonia is burned in excess oxygen over a platinum catalyst to form nitric
oxide (NO):
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) 850 C, 5 atm
Pt  ° → 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)
Step 2: Additional air is added to cool the mixture and oxidize NO to NO2:
2NO(g) + O2(g) —→ 2NO2(g)
Step 3: The NO2 gas is bubbled into warm water where it reacts to give nitric acid
and nitric oxide:
3NO2(g) + H2O(l) —→ 2HNO3(aq) + NO(g)
 recycled
The nitric oxide (NO) is recycled in Step 2.
The largest percentage of nitric acid is used to synthesize ammonium nitrate, a water
soluble fertiliser. Large quantities are also used to make plastics, drugs, and explosives
such as trinitrotoluene (TNT) and nitroglycerine.
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
253
Exercise 5.14
1. Describe the properties of nitric acid.
2. Show the preparation of nitric acid by the Ostwald process.
3. What are the main uses of nitric acid?
3. Sulphuric Acid (H2
SO4 )
Sulphuric acid is the world’s most important industrial chemical, and the rate of
consumption of sulphuric acid is a measure of a country’s industrialization. Pure
H2SO4 melts at 10.5°C and boils at 338°C. Anhydrous H2SO4 and concentrated
H2SO4 mix with water in all proportions and release large amounts of heat energy
(880 kJ/mol).
If water is poured into concentrated acid, the heat evolved leads to boiling of the
water and causes violent splashing. The safe way to dilute strong acids is to carefully
pour the acid into the water while stirring. Concentrated H2SO4 has strong oxidizing
properties.
Do you know where sulphuric acid is manufactured in Ethiopia?
Sulphuric acid is prepared industrially by the contact process, using four steps:
Step 1: Burning sulphur in air:
S(s) + O2(g) —→ SO2(g)
Step 2: Converting SO2 to SO3
2SO2(g) + O2(g) V O catalyst 2 5
400 C° → 2SO3(g)
The conversion of SO2 to SO3 is slow, but it is increased by heating the
reaction mixture to 400oC in the presence of V2
O5 catalyst. Because the
SO2 and O2 molecules react on contact with the surface of V2O5, the
process is called Contact process.
Step 3: Passing SO3 into concentrated H2SO4:
SO3(g) + H2SO4(l) —→ H2S2O7(l)
 Pyrosulphuric acid
 (oleum or fuming sulphuric acid)
Step 4: Addition of water to pyrosulphuric acid
H2S2O7(l) + H2O(l) —→ 2H2SO4(aq)
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
254
Uses of sulphuric acid
Sulphuric acid is used in the production of fertilisers, detergents, plastics and paints. It
is used in the production of a number of explosives. Sulphuric acid is an oxidizing
agent and a good dehydrating agent. It is often used to dry neutral and acidic gases
such as nitrogen, oxygen, and carbon dioxide. It is also used as electrolyte in car
batteries. It is also used as a catalyst in the manufacture of many chemicals.
Exercise 5.15
1. Describe the industrial production of H2
SO4
. Write the equations and state the
conditions of each step.
2. State the properties and major uses of sulphuric acid.
Form a group and discuss each of the following questions:
1. What are some of the indications that the soil in which plants grow, is deficient in:
a nitrogen? b phosphorus ? c potassium?
2. Why the large-scale use of synthetic fertilizers can be harmful to the environment?
After the discussion, share your ideas with the rest of the class.
4. Diammonium monohydrogen phosphate (DAP), (NH4 )2
HPO4
Diammonium monohydrogen phosphate (DAP) is a white crystalline compound that is
completely soluble in water. How is DAP produced industrially? It can be produced
when ammonia reacts with phosphoric acid by the following two steps:
Step 1: Anhydrous ammonia reacts with phosphoric acid to form monoammonium
dihydrogen phosphate and diammonium monohydrogen phosphate
3NH3(g) + 2H3PO4(l) —→ NH4H2PO4(s) + (NH4)2HPO4(s)
Step 2: Recycling monoammonium dihydrogen phosphate for further reaction with
anhydrous ammonia yields DAP:
NH4H2PO4(s) + NH3(g) —→ (NH4)2HPO4(s)
Activity 5.12
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
255
DAP is used as a fertiliser. When applied as plant food, it temporarily increases soil
acidity, but over the long term, the soil becomes more acidic than before upon
nitrification of the ammonium. DAP has the advantage of having both nitrogen and
phosphorus, which are essential for plant growth.
DAP can be used as fire retardant. It lowers the combustion temperature of the
material, decreases weight-loss rates, and causes an increase in the production of
residue or char.
DAP is also used as a yeast nutrient in wine making and beer brewing.
Exercise 5.16
1. Describe the industrial production of DAP. Write the chemical equations.
2. State properties and major uses of DAP.
3. Calculate the percentage composition of phosphorus and nitrogen in
diammonium monohydrogen phosphate.
Unit Summary
• There are 113 elements in the periodic table. Of these, 92 elements occur
in nature, and the others are man-made.
• Minerals that are suitable for the extraction of elements are called ores.
• All ores are minerals, but not all minerals are ores.
• The twelve most abundant elements in the earth's crust, in decreasing order
of abundance, are: oxygen, silicon, aluminium, iron, calcium, magnesium,
sodium, potassium, titanium, hydrogen, phosphorus and manganese.
• Metals found in the Earth's crust are in the form of oxides, carbonates,
sulphides, halides, sulphates and phosphates.
• Nutrients are limited in nature, and they are exchanged between living
and nonliving things.
• In the carbon cycle, atmospheric carbon dioxide is converted to glucose
by green plants. Animals incorporate carbon by eating plants or other
animals. Carbon returns to the physical environment during respiration,
the burning of wood or fossil fuels, and the decomposition of plants and
animals.
• In the nitrogen cycle, atmospheric nitrogen is converted to nitrogen
compounds by lightning, through the Haber process or by bacteria on
 CHEMISTRY GRADE 12
256
root nodules of leguminous plants. Plants use these compounds to
prepare their proteins and nucleic acids. Animals also prepare their
proteins and nucleic acids through eating plants or other animals.
Nitrogen returns to the atmosphere during the decomposition of plants
and animals through the action of denitrifying bacteria.
• The phosphorus cycle differs from the nitrogen and carbon cycles
primarily because phosphorus cannot exist in gaseous form in the
atmosphere. Plants absorb phosphates, using their roots, and make
DNA, and ATP. Animals get phosphates by eating plants or other
animals. When plants and animals die, they decompose and return
phosphates into the soil or water.
• Metallurgy is the science and technology of extracting metals from their
natural sources and preparing them for practical use. This process has
three main steps: concentrating the ore, extracting the metal and
purifying the crude metal.
• Sodium is the 7th most abundant element in the Earth's crust and is
extracted from molten sodium chloride using Downs cell.
• Calcium is the 5th most abundant element in the Earth's crust and is
extracted from molten calcium chloride. It is a major component in
bones and teeth.
• Tin is mainly extracted from cassiterite (SnO2 ), using coke as reducing
agent. It is used to make alloys.
• Lead can be extracted from galena (PbS) by partially oxidizing galena
and self-reduction. It is used to make lead /acid storage batteries.
• Zinc is extracted from zinc blende (ZnS) by roasting, followed by
reduction with carbon monoxide. Large amounts of zinc are used for
coating iron.
• Chromium is extracted from chromite ore (FeCr2O4 ): First it is oxidized
to sodium chromate (Na2CrO4 ). Then sodium chromate is converted to
sodium dichromate by the addition of acids. Next the sodium dichromate
is reduced to chromium (III) oxide, using carbon. Finally, Cr2O3 is
reduced to chromium metal by aluminium. Chromium is used to make
alloys.
SOME ELEMENTS IN CHEMISTRY AND INDUSTRY (UNIT 5)
257
• Silicon is the 2nd most abundant element in the Earth's crust and is
extracted from silica, using carbon as reducing agent. Silicon is used in
the construction of transistors and microprocessors.
• Ammonia is prepared by the Haber process and is mainly used to make
fertilisers.
• Nitric acid is prepared by the Ostwald process, and is used to make
fertilizers, plastics and explosives.
• Sulphuric acid is produced by the Contact process, and is mainly used to
make fertilizers, detergents and paints.
• Diammonium monohydrogen phosphate (DAP) is prepared by reacting
anhydrous ammonia with phosphoric acid in two steps. DAP is mainly
used as a fertilizer.